 I'm working on a project called Climbedat Mountain and it's an idea that came from some tweets that I was sharing with friends. And I put a link in the agenda to an overview of the project, its goals and sample use cases and some contact information and places to explore. But I just want to show a demo. We're using a tool called Tiger, which is an agile tool and Christine and I have been working to define epics and a can ban board about some sample use cases that we want to support. So this project is to figure out ways that decentralized technology could be used in educational settings, both online and offline. And what I have been exploring is the beaker browser. So I put together a small prototype of a sample class in beaker browser. And what I want to show you is that this homepage is very simple to code. Once you have your components defined. So like these are old pictures, which would be the students. And if we could develop toolbox of components that educators could use to put together their own web pages. There are scenarios that we could enable, which would allow for student interaction to be very private. And just to show in the class, so say a student takes a lesson. So they may get an article to read and it can open up an article on the web. And this is a debt URL, which is a decentralized protocol. But somebody who's more of an auditory learner may want to download and play a recording. So it could be an MP three file. Now these things can be packaged up into the site and downloaded offline. So a person on an airplane or a person in a remote village can use it. And then when it's time for interaction, the teacher can prepare an assignment. And the students can make an editable copy of this web page very easily. They can save it locally. And this is their own personal copy of the class. And they could edit the page and save it locally. And they could share it with the, they could even create their own new website. So, so watch this create new website. And it's minting a new URL and it's now very easy for to have a sample page that it and interact with. So this is a beaker browser that I'm demonstrating and see. So eventually we'll have things like taking a quiz and multiple learning paths and mentoring protocols. So I've outlined the main ideas, but what we need are people with experience and education to help us design where this system is going to go. And in an agile manner, the high level functionality of the system will be defined in epics and then user stories will come out of that and they can be drilled down. And I'm also using the brain to map ideas as they come to me because there are challenges in the current implementation of these protocols, some keeping track of what we're going what we're expecting to see happen in the future before it becomes viable for a real class. So this is a long term project and it could go in many directions, but we need people to help shape the direction of where it's going. So available for any questions. Okay, thanks for that.