 Hello world. Today I'm going to walk through some documents that I posted, which I drew on paper and then put on the internet and people can't read them. That's fine. I'm going to walk through it eventually. I'll clean this up and put it into more formal presentation, but for now this is what I have. Now notice the push pin. There's a reason for that. Peter Van Hardenberg has a system called push pin, which is quite amazing. Think of it as your own personal notebook for taking notes and pasting whatever you want into it. I've used it. It's actively under development, so check it out. But this is long-term thinking, just based on my experience of what I would want and what based on some ideas about Ted Nelson that I researched. So on my PC, I want to have private areas and public areas and consider these like websites or applications that I build. In Beaker browser, currently there is that concept, the private hyperdrive and public hyperdrives. It's all based on private and public key cryptography. My work in progress would be in private and when I publish it, it would be in a public hyperdrive that if people know how to get to me with this hyper address, they could get it directly from my machine when I'm on or the long-term solution is to have a pinning service such as dat. So what I want to be able to do is to periodically publish my work in progress because like I was working on a song and it had five revisions. So I did revisions one, two, and three. I want to be able to send it over time to an official repository, which is really just a replicated copy of my hyperdrive. So I would think of it like a GitHub fork. So I got this would be forking from my hyperdrive and like getting the latest. So there's a curation process to update an official copy. So say you had like three people working on something, you know, there's some need for some workflow there. Okay, but I'm looking at dat.as cloud storage outside of corporate interests. So now in terms of organization of my work, I want definitely versions and directories, but I like the idea of Ted's Nelson's tumblers where everything about documents is always stored. It's always a pen only, which is like a hypercore. So like here's a hyperdrive of tumblers and EDLs. That's an edit decision list. So I like the model of Xanadu Cambridge, which Ted Nelson demonstrates where people can create an EDL. It pulls in content. They can edit their EDL. So it could be like a personal EDL that they can then share with people. Now sharing would be done through a web of trust with whatever encryption, a noise that can be implemented easily for people. Now, so I can my music example. I published versions one through three and then version four. I changed the name of the song and then version five. I went back to the original name. So like if you're trying to index that you would, they really are logically the same song, but yeah, you want. So what a tumbler directory structure gives you, it's like in a numeric outline, like 1.2, 1.2.1, 1.2.1.1.1. to whatever level of depth you need. So like this could have been a 3.1, a 3.2. So Ted describes this in his book literary machines in detail. So I feel like the concepts can be reused. He also talks about infillate theory. So he was thinking about like hard disk drives and how you would locate material. And it's always appending and keeping pointers intact. So there are other ways of doing this now in a network operating system like the dat protocol. So see the point was he wanted a permanent address. So like the permanent address for version three is my hyper feed address and a directory which is like a tumbler. You could just keep adding sub-directories as much as you can. And so it's the EDL that would reconstruct what you need. So like say I'm pulling some bytes from version three, a bytes from version five. Like maybe version one had most of everything. Version two is an EDL where I change one part of the text. Okay now what I'd also like to see is a smart contract that can give me a time lock or a time capsule. So when my private files get published publicly, if anything happens to me or like if I estimate 50 years from now I have some private things that I don't want published in my lifetime. I want that to be possible where I can but in order to implement that you need a reliable clock source. So let's see. Local network, Xana viewers, prototype and AB test the interfaces. I mean that's what would be required to build something. Now the point of that is some applications can be customized for different user communities and needs. So think of it like accessibility. Maybe text needs to be read aloud with a screen reader. So that would be a new application running on the same data. So the data is only data and that's what data is sharing in a manner that you can be assured like a public cloud that it is stored because smart contracts are enforcing that the people hosting these are storing it and that it is being delivered. So then that is a disincentive for bad actors in that ecosystem. So dat. would serve my hyper feed as a CDN. So okay. So when a user would connect to my feed it's the same address. They could download all or part of my hyper drive and if we have the block addressing and I know maps in there then it is possible to calculate the segments of the hyper core that would be needed. So essentially the tumblers aren't so use they would first like download a table of contents which is an EDL at a decision list and that they would be able to know which tumblers need to be retrieved and that mapping of the tumblers to the eye nodes or whatever physical storage is built would allow them to get what they want. So as an example this KMDMP is a notation for an archive piece of music that I worked on. So I would have different. So that the files that represent that evolved over time. Eventually I have a digitized notation file and it's a tumbler which is like just a dotted list of decimal numbers but just as an example say like this dot 40 dot 10 dot 1 is my latest version dot 2 is older versions. So like I could do like 1 dot 1 1 dot 2 1 dot 3 for successive versions the numbering scheme is up to the application. But so yeah let's just look at what else. So once I digitized the tune I then arranged it a C part and a B flat part. So I call these bands stand scores that's what the project I'm working on calls them are their PDF files. So think about the problem of version control in music. Like say arrange a piece you give it to a band and then you realize oh I need some mistakes I got to clean that up and I should fix this part and then rebuild these you know re-extract the parts from the score. It's a complicated version control system and if you were just using files and naming them dot 1 dot 2 dot 3 you go crazy trying to figure out what to do. So like for now what I've done until I have a system like this is I have directories. So for now what I've done this is like my work in progress and these are the files that I uploaded. Like this is a music score file and a PDF and I uploaded this on June 27th at 5am. So this is my attempt at version control just using directories and then the band stand score parts are here. So if I have added that I'd have to create sub directories for versions. So you can see how messy it can get. Okay but thinking about let's just go back to this. So in my personal drive when I'm building this there's this piece I'm working on and there are original source photos of the music because this comes from a library in the Ukraine. Then there are notebook entries by Moshe Baragovsky describing what he knew about these pieces when he looked at the notebook and then there's a tracking spreadsheet of metadata which is being maintained in a Google spreadsheet. People are editing so yeah that's what we have currently. But like maybe I want my own like fork of that spreadsheet. Some private notes and some public notes and like maybe I'm not sure about something right away so I want to keep it private until I do more research and then that the 40 came from all the files related to my work on the piece. So my original and derived files. So like I use a software called lilypon where you could take a text file and it converts it into a PDF of music notation. Yeah so the source file the lilypon is related to the PDFs and now it does XML. So I want to know that this PDF was derived from this source. Okay so maybe under the tumbler for .40 I would have like 10 is the published PDF, 20 is the music XML file, 30 is the music score file. So really by application this structure would be defined. Okay and then I do a Facebook post about the piece. Well how do you track things on Facebook connect them to your work or files or GitHub. It's messy. Well let's say I have an edl. So here I have like a link a Xana link between my tumbler for my notation files and an edl that points to that Facebook post. Okay so that I can bring that in when I need to reference it. Let's try to find something on Facebook after a week. It's crazy. Okay and then I derived works. So like once I note the piece, yeah the dance client score is one derivative work but I could have videos of my rehearsals and performances of the piece. So like the video I put up yesterday of me playing that song while sitting at that piano I went through maybe 10 times of playing it just to before I got a version that I liked and you'll hear all the mistakes. Maybe somebody's interested in seeing that what kind of mistakes I made practicing a new piece and maybe they're teaching piano. They want to know a sample student. Okay so like here edl to my video. Yeah so like if I was playing it on the clarinet I would want to link the B flat score to the video of me playing that. So like maybe the videos could be .70 and .80 but it is possible to have a timeline in this tumbler structure and it could be a timeline where you could insert in the future at any point where you can restructure easily and maybe the inflate would help with that. The point is keep everything always in your hyper drives, your hypercours and allow it allowed that to serve it but use webs of trust. So say I only want to share it with two people. I would if I could encrypt everything and create a hyper drive where just those people have access to the encrypted version and they can it could be re-encrypted with their public keys. So that's what I want people to think creative about. So eventually the point is there is no authoritative source. Only curated hyperdrives with user created links, Xana links that people can follow to make up their own minds based on their personal trust models. So say Alice Bob and Carol are a small group maybe they're working on music but this is the then diagram of what they know about each other and their work. So this number one only Alice knows certain piece of information. Like maybe she just downloaded something from a library archive and Bob and Carol don't know about it yet but then she shares that with Bob but not Carol. So that's this area and then Bob has some private info that he's not ready to share yet but he's working on it and then for is Alice and Carol but not Bob. Now this five is the group commons. So right now that could be a Google drive, a Google spreadsheet and maybe they're all contributing to it but what should a commons be? Well if this is a web of trust a file sharing network and they're internationally distributed. Dat.can support that if they do encryption on top of their hyperdrives. So that private public concept of public hyperdrive for all three or anyone else they invite in the group later would be a web of trust where it could be re-keyed if Bob has to get out of the group and Alice and Carol don't trust them anymore they should be able to re-key anything forward, perfect forward secrecy. Okay so Alice and Carol but not Bob the group commons. So number six is Bob and Carol but not Alice and seven is Carol's private hyperdrives and maybe they are time locked with a smart contract to publish after a specific date or a specific condition with a reliable network time source. So I mean that's going to be important. People need the confidence that they can put things up in the cloud and no one can read them until they decide they're ready to publish them or or they die or something. Yeah time lock. Okay so now eight is outside info that the group doesn't know so maybe all their communications are being recorded by the government. They're doing a conspiracy now. So yeah so there's a blind self in a way I look at this as like you know your public self, your blind self, your hidden self from psychology. Okay but that is a fact of the system that they don't know they're being spied on. Okay so but that could be represented like the government hyperdrive. They're dossier on these three guys, three people. Okay but I also like to think of this in terms of sense making. So we can't trust our media anymore. So like media source one says that this is a conspiracy theory whatever media source two reported and media source two says oh no that that's fake news. Well who do you believe? Well each each person has to make up their own mind these days. So like Alice gets her feed from media source one and she believes it's a conspiracy theory. Bob gets his feed. Oh no don't trust media source one that they send out fake news. So that's Bob's belief but whatever little communication they have here that's where that could either enlarge or shrink based on Alice and Bob's trust for each other and their discussions. Now how do they make their case to each other? Well they have to do their own research they need supporting evidence and where's that gonna come from? Other fake news sources on the internet, other crazy stuff out there or will you have hyper publishers? Maybe you have an inside source in a country that Alice knows a friend in a country that's undergoing a political change and maybe she can get supporting evidence, keep it private but disclose what she needs to to Bob to open up a little bit of that communication but not the whole thing and maybe she has a feed where a hyper publisher or blogger publishes updates and this is also part of a web of trust. I mean if it's public they publish an open hyper drive. Okay but now Bob has to justify why I think so. Why I think that source one is sending fake news? Well he may have a private hyper drive where he starts working on that. Why I think so maybe just his own commentary of his experience, his story, what makes him think that but then maybe he finds some evidence. But I mean it's the same thing it's all about triangulating your sources and having multiple sources of information but if Bob shares a little of that in this area, Alice would be able to then look through the whole tree that's shared and see all the sources. So maybe Bob is writing an essay and he says well I found this on Russia today and then it has a exclusion of that maybe a paragraph of that article. Now think about what you have now. If you want to read an article, you get ads popping up all over the place and you're scared that is it a real site? Is there a JavaScript? It's going to do something harmful. Yeah well you still have that unless you see it's all about trust which we've lost. The early internet was assuming a certain level of trust but see essentially people are building their folk sonnames. Okay so like another example, a folk sonnemy is not authoritative. Well you think Wikipedia is authoritative? Ask a high school teacher. It's just available for personal sense making enjudgment. So I mean that's going to be the key going forward. Everybody having their personal way of making sense of the information that's shoved at them and yeah so this process of adapt really expressing yourself, people cannot express themselves easily these days. Yeah so under areas of censorship. So being able to have a private area that you can share a little bit with a trusted network and then more over time and maybe his thinking changes maybe after talking with Alice a lot he starts looking at her sources and makes up his own mind that okay I wasn't this guy I can't trust him anymore but yeah I could maybe look at this one. So that's what we need the bill information availability and that's an objective of . . Now let's look at how this can be taken in the future. So Ted Nelson designed a zigzag database system. Think of it as a spreadsheet where you could insert data between cells and it has multiple dimensions so you can rotate in various dimensions and see your cells rearrange themselves on the screen to make sense in that dimension and it's all orthogonal which means right angles. So with 3D web software these days you can show a 3D structure easily and open GL it's just using XML you can show 3D now what if you have a second monitor that renders the linked media on demand. So as you're navigating this and rotating in different dimensions this other monitor would show the linked documents. So Ted had a flight of documents with all the visible connections a lot of bridges when you have a lot of sources that can get on wheeled but if I find that I like the zigzag data structure model but whatever is built it requires some user experience analysis really AB testing. So rotate in any dimension on xy or z. Romp analysis means representations or operations methods and controls something I learned in college for expert systems design and considering person's learning style if it could be flexible for different types of learners maybe different paths to follow. Okay so Ted mentioned different ways of representing text. The one that he mentions is a cylinder that you could rotate and see like before and after. A little bit of before and after Mike him up with the Torah idea where you have a scroll that you can rotate to see more and then you see in columns of text with Xanelings going out or coming in and Ted talks about the Talmud where you had Hebrew text from the Bible and then commentaries about that text all around it parallel page. But basically Xanelings space the source code is available and I've looked at it a little bit it's hard but it's elegant but it's really emergent the source code is just given the tools for the structure to emerge. With zigzag is the database underneath Xanelings space it renders the flight all the documents in the background and the current document you're looking at it creates the tetroids which are the paragraphs that are you're connecting and then it builds the bridges between the to translude between the source documents and document you're looking at it has slabs in open GL which are like thin rectangles thin boxes where it renders the text on top of it. So these are visual aids that can be evaluated. Okay so curation and co-creation. Okay let's look at this a little bit. Curation, self-selecting of opinions of your trust network nothing is discarded. Okay and then co-curation. So what I'm trying to say here is if people are curating and you have people collaborating on curating information you should have a pull request model where Alice Bob and Carol one of them finds something that they think is relevant to the topic under curation they should be able to do a pull request to whoever's maintaining that curation. So pull requests are it's from GitHub but think of it as you've read something and you're marking it up with a pencil and you want to give some feedback your feedback should always be connected to something in the document. So if say Carol is the curator and Alice marks up something so the markup is starts on our personal hyperdrive and then gets shared out with Carol first and Carol can pull it in to the latest version of the document that she's working on. Now there's concurrency issues that can be solved with timestamps but see attracting the versions and so like Ted was all about editing online where it tracks every change but now you know people are working offline yeah there are models that work and there are conflict resolution protocols. Okay but let's see what else co-creation. Okay so you have a personal web space exclusion to others information and you can fork and essentially you're building your own personal learning mountains so I like to think of education like mountains Mount JavaScript Mount Rust or whatever mountain because it seems like whenever something new comes out you have to read a thousand pages before you can do anything. All right so here is somebody mentoring me on Mount JavaScript throwing me down a rope trying to pull me up to the next level. That's what I would like to see implemented in a decentralized educational system and then so here are people climbing Mount Rust maybe this person blazes a different path that can go around here and go up to the summit a different way and maybe they can put that path in a living document and under construction and maybe get some input from people lower. Hey does this help you understand this and maybe there could be co-creation that person's got a great idea that they can do a pull request and this person could accept it or reject it. So that's the future of us collaborating together and here we are on Earth we've got some stuff in space on the ISS. Space knowledge has fueled a lot of our learning but how are we going to get to Star Trek where we have Starship we have Zephyrm Cochran and then we have Starships that are warping exploring the galaxy. Well you need somebody up here who climbs some mountains who can envision the future and blaze the trail. So you're blazing different paths but who's going to blaze the trail forward and what does that person need? Well in depending on where they live in the world these days they need certain levels of protection of their ideas. Okay so hopefully we can get to a continuous evolution for Earth and revolution because that's sometimes what it takes to allow ideas to live. So what we're looking at, nothing is discarded that's possible these days. We're looking at unwalled gardens which Paul Frazy has talked about. You're not locked into a corporate app, custom and alternative presentation layers. Okay so here is your data data. So you have connected hyper drives, hypercores on dat. Which I believe is the correct future platform for storing storage management. And I like the way that we're just biting off one problem at a time because we have wicked problems in the world. So I'm just laying out options. So think about options for 3D virtual reality augmented reality and eventually holographic technology that can access this data and render it in different ways, different experiences. That's more UX research. But open up the imagination. And the key is to separate data from presentation, the strict separation of your data structures. So people are all working on their own parts of the ecosystem. But if we could have a globally connected earth of communication, we have some hope. Thank you. So one more idea I want to talk about is trans copyright. So Ted Nelson has some videos that give a demo of it. So like say you follow a exclusion to a journal article and the source quoted one paragraph of that journal article. Well, if you wanted to read a little bit forward or backward in that article, you should be able to purchase just what you need, like maybe down to the character. Yeah, I want to buy that little asterisk. You can be using micro payments. You should be able to buy like a paragraph or a page. Now it is possible like with PDFs to separate out pages and serve them individually. So that would make sense with our current data in them. But it is done through encryption. The publisher would encrypt it with a key. And then when somebody buys it, they send the publisher their public key and then they receive the encrypted document that they could decrypt whatever little piece of it. And that could be done with hyper drives or hypercours or whatever we imagine. So I want us to be creative and think about how we can use what we know to create the world we need. Thank you.