 Well, Xerox Park was a research lab set up by Xerox when they were making a lot of profits in the copier days. And they were doing some computer science research which was basically an extension of some stuff started by a guy named Doug Engelbart when he was at SRI. Doug had invented the mouse and invented the bitmap display. And some Xerox folks that Xerox, I believe, hired away from Doug or split off from Doug somehow and got to Xerox were continuing along in this vein. And I first went over there in 1979 and I saw what they were doing with the larger screens, proportionally spaced text and the mouse. And it was just instantly obvious to anyone that this was the way things should be. And so I remember coming back to Apple thinking our future is just changed. This is where we have to go. There are many ways to move around and to make views. And this is one of the basic features of this tool we have. Well, suppose I worked for some time at this and then called my wife to get the rest of the list, I'd eventually end up with a whole structure. All right, I could say gee, there were a lot of things in markets you still have to stop to. See what I was supposed to get in the market. All produce, cans, cereals, what about cereals? All cereals, bread, noodles, and like that. Okay, back up there if I want to look at the numbers, that's what I can. If I want to open up everything, see that or many lines, there are many ways in which I can. But there's another thing I can do. There's a route I said I'd have here. So here I'm afraid I'll need a different picture of you. So here's what I do with a picture drawing capability. It's a slight map if I start from work. And here's the route I seem to have to go to to pick up all the materials. And that's my plan for getting home tonight. But if I wander, I can say the library, what am I supposed to pick up there? I can just point to that. And oh, I see overdue books and all. While there was a statement there with that name, I go back. What if I want to pick up the drugstore? I see you very soon. I can do things if I want to just say I'd like to interchange the produce and canned materials and go. And they're all numbered right here if I care to look. Interchanging them very quickly. Cans are going to get interchange with produce. They do it and all gets renumbered. So I have ways of studying over, making different views, moving around, going to specified points and modifying the structure. At the same time, I've seen that I have a repertoire of different entities like character, knock off that character, replace the character, make that pee. So I have entities of all sorts that I can say I want to do operations on. And this basic structure that I can move over and study and get about very quickly. This is the staffing over the years from 1950 on. And it's had slightly bumpy history. In these years, there was only one of us. Basic goal, improve the effectiveness with which individuals and organizations work at intellectual tasks. What is your effectiveness involved then? Better solutions, faster solutions, solutions to more complex problems that better use of human capabilities. Really thinking about that. But a corollary goal is, besides improving the effectiveness, to develop a system oriented discipline for designing the means by which greater effectiveness is achieved. Can you hear me down? Which turn it over? We'll see, right. It's principle is that there are two wheels that roll on the surface. But since there are right angles in kind of sharp edges, one roll and the other slide in one direction, each of these wheels controls through a potentiometer with a voltage output, sampled by an AVD converter. Other features of the mouse are that it stays put. I can lift it and replace it without having a spot change so I can adjust where I want it for my comfort. And these control buttons on the top are used quite a bit. And I'll show you a little bit later how some of those are used. Now the keyboard and the middle is essentially a standard tie-priter keyboard, except for a few special keys out on the side. The computer knows it instantly when you hit one and makes an appropriate response. This device over here is unique to us. And we always have to justify and explain it. We'll do it in reverse order. We'll explain it first. It provides for you the one handy equivalent of what you can do with a keyboard. There are five keys and normally each finger sits on a key and depressing any one key at a time produces a character. And any two keys at a time also. And in fact any combination of depressing of which there are 31 combinations. And my left hand, I'm using a five finger key set in which I can use chords type characters that I could otherwise type at the keyboard. And then my right hand, I'm using a mouse pointing device. And the combination of inputting commands at the key set and pointing with the mouse is actually a little faster than switching between the keyboard and the mouse. So the key set will be helping me through this. This demonstration is about the augment reference handbook which is a dynamic hyper document. We'll talk more about hyper documents as we go along. And we're using computer system in St. Louis, Missouri connected to that system by a timet connection. And the screen here at the top of the screen is some system feedback information. A command line base, the base editing system and some special view indicators to show what kind of a view we have at the moment. Now I want to activate a command that will split our screen into several windows. And these are some topics that I'd like to cover. Cover as many as we can in the time that we have here. The information environment that the augment system supports. I want to talk about where it is, what it is, and get some ideas about how to access it. The augment system supports some computerized libraries called journal libraries. And there are many different libraries depending on which organization is supporting them. There's an augment library and augmentation systems, division, library and others. And there's information in those various libraries that people want to tie together. And then there's also operational information, user guides, program documentation, things of that nature. And of course there's a lot of personal information in an augment system. You can see this last view is going into the bottom window. And what kind of information are we talking about here? Well, I'm not going to read you the list, but it includes visions, plans, reports, proposals, dialogue, intelligence, indexes, catalogs, all sorts of things. And when people have an interest in a particular subject, it really helps to have some tools that sort of organize that information for you in advance. We'll start the demo in this classic piece written by our founder, Deg Engelbart, who's our inspiration for this initiative. The hyperscope paradigm offers a variety of ways to view the document. For example, you can continue to see just the first line of every paragraph we're heading. What is this file I've landed in? Is it even relevant to my pursuit? Adjust the line shown for more or less detail or collapse it up to an outline view of the document, adjusting the depth of level shown to suit the moment. In this view we're seeing blank lines between these paragraphs. And we see more of the document if we hide the blank lines. Again, we can hide or show at will. Based on that outline, these purple numbers are provided as a further visual cue for how it's shaping up. And as a point of reference, showing where you are in the document as you scroll. Again, you can hide or show at will. These purple numbers have the added benefit of letting you jump by number. You just click on the number, allowing you to navigate with precision. And always wherever you find yourself in the document, you can pop back up to the top or origin of the file in one jump. Besides the classic outline view of the document, you can also see a table of contents view showing just the headings. Select from the headings. Jump back to the origin. View it as a table of contents or stop viewing it as a table of contents. In our pre-bate aversion, we've gone with this dashboard thing using buttons to make stuff happen. Y and Z show or hide the blank lines, hide, show, M and N hide or show the purple numbers. X gives you your outline view. B and A are plus one or minus one more levels and W for a full view. N and T, which actually is pneumonic, gives you the table of contents view and you revert back to a full view. And the view specs work in any combination you like. For example, turn on the table of contents, turn off the blank lines, turn off the numbers, turn off the table of contents, and so on. Okay, so let's take a look at the GitHub for this project, GitHub.com, eRangil, KFES 2024. So, A to P key set has code for testing a core key set using Doug Engelbart's key mappings with two simulated mouse buttons. See the key set JPEG for the schematic. So let's take a look at that. Okay, so this is the wiring, but here is the schematic. So on the game socket pin one is your power and you have five switches going to these pins, which is switch to paddle zero one two and three. So this is say you have a two plus and there are other ways of doing this and your thumb goes here, your pinky goes here and then I wanted to simulate a three button mouse using two three and four, which are switch zero one and two. Okay, now for Engelbart's design for the switches you only need two buttons. So there are four different combinations that he recognizes. So this left and center button are the two that are used. So the plus five volts goes to those two switches and you need to have a resistor to ground for them to work on the two plus and other computers properly. Okay, so this is if you have an internal joystick socket and that's what the code is configured for. So this two and three are switches zero and one in the apple language switch to is used for the thumb button of the key set. Okay, and then there is a disk image if you download this disk image. Okay, then you run that disk image in your favorite emulator. Shout out to April and melody. Okay, so it boots up this program. If on the two plus that I was first testing with, I had to disconnect the ground wire for the shift key, but most of the time you don't need that. And now you can test the program here and then you can list it. So we're going to take a look at this listing. So this is the paddle button zero c061, which is used to reference all the other buttons. And I am figuring out the character strings for the lower case and uppercase and the tab. So let's take another look at that chart. The schematic. Okay, so at the bottom of this schematic, we have the key codes. So they are binary from one to 31 and normally it's lower case. So if none of the mouse buttons are pressed, you get lower case, you get a comma period semicolon question mark in space. So you push all five keys to put spaces between words. And then if you hold down the left mouse mouse button, you'll get the uppercase characters and these characters and the tab. So if you're doing word processing most of the time you can do spaces and tabs. There's a debate here. Okay, so now if you hold the left button down. Okay, that's the right. Okay, so if it's zero one, that means you're right, your center mouse button is down. If it's your left mouse button is down, you got to think of your typing a one or you're typing a two or you're typing a three. Okay, now I added some functionality. If you're just pressing these buttons without any key set codes to add some characters like the pipe and the tilde. These are the characters, which are the shifted numbers and the numbers and then the brackets and then alt is really an escape key in angle bark turns and carriage return. So when you want to carriage return at the end of the line, you're holding the left button. So you're thinking of two and you're holding all the buttons down. And then if you hold both of these now you are doing commands in NLS. So like showing one level less showing one level deeper showing all the levels. So this is expanding and collapsing outlines. The recreate display was often needed in NLS to refresh. But these are really view specs. Like so, Plex is a statement and all the sub levels under it. And we saw the the M and N for the statement numbers on and off and Z Y and Z are blank lines on and off. So you're actually learning these keys for the view specs and they can be typed with the key set. So that's what gave Engelbart a lot of speed. So showing one more line or one less line as he's reading the document. So these are features that we do not have in current applications, especially when we're reading things on the web. So Engelbart's vision was to have a single network system. And to have all documents integrated where you could jump to links to anywhere between them, similar to Ted Nelson's ideas. Engelbart's is more outlined driven and higher article. Looking at this code, yeah, I'm trying to simulate exactly what we saw on that key chart. Okay, so let's see control S. Yeah, print the word base because in NLS that top line will change based on what you type. I haven't implemented any of that. I may do that on a 2GS version. Because I would like to change the wiring so that it just uses paddle 2 and 3 to get 8 buttons. Because there are 5 on the key set and 2 3 mouse buttons. And that could be re engineered, but this is a prototype. Okay, poke 34 to gives you the two lines at the top as you scroll as you're seeing here. And then let's see, yeah, there's some special characters, but I'm reading the four paddles. And I am doing some garbage collection and printing some magic good things. Let's see 127 and character 8 for the cursor. Okay, then I'm getting the buttons. 0 1 and 2 getting the statuses and checking an array. I'm creating an array from the state of the buttons and the mouse switches. Okay, and then I have phase processing one. Okay, so there's some crazy logic that I can't figure out what I was doing. And let's see, poke. I am poking. It's the screen. And okay, that's what's doing the little display as I push the buttons. Okay, so then I calculate bytes. See, this is the fun of apples. You could write things and never figure out. Yeah, they work and then you never know how you did anything when you go back and look at your code. Okay, so if a byte is 31. So it's possible to trace through here. I'm blanking, yeah, doing things on the top of the screen poking. Yes, I'm poking the screen is a lot of fun in apple soft and in machine language. Yeah, here's the old key. We fell through to shifted mode. Okay, so I'm really determining what mode it is based on the buttons you pressed. And let's see. Okay, so there's data statements here. And yeah, if you press everything, it exits the program. So here are all the view spec data statements. And that's the prototype for the two plus on this a to p key set disk image. And here's an apple soft program called Doug, which you're looking at right now, which is used for testing your key set. And as you press the buttons, you will see these things go on and off. And when you test your left and right buttons of your three button mouse, then you will see those numbers change. Okay, and the main program that simulates Doug's system is called type cord dot base. And this is the listing. And you can see data statements with the Englebart functions. So when you run it, you usually just press return and then you begin typing on your keyboard. And so let's do an H and E five and one, yeah, five. And L is 12. So it's eight and four. And 0 is 15. Okay, and if we want capital, we'd have to use the buttons to use the Englebart key combinations for that. This is a demonstration of a program called think tank by living video text. And it'll allow you to create outlines. And this is just a demo disk that came with it that has sample outlines. So let's expand lesson plans. And this unit examines literary content form and style through the medium of science fiction. Sounds like a fun class. And let's see what week one is imagination. You have to read as a mouth, nightfall, Bradbury, Mars and his heaven and Herbert Dune, park one. And your assignment. Imagine there is life on blurf the fourth planet of the alpha centauri. Okay, so there is a windowing system here to, let's see, I'm tuned to window position. Okay, scroll the text left or scroll the text down or up. Okay, and you learn all about you exit and you're back to where you started. Okay, okay, so what we are looking at is a mud, but what is running in is all term 0.21. And all term can use a game pad as a cord key set. So the A button is a 1, B is a 2, C is a 4, D is an 8, and the right arrow is a 16. So if I want to go to the civil war, I have to type a C, which is 2 plus 1 and a W, which is the right plus A, B and C and hit enter. And now I am in the civil war lobby. If I want to go to the general headquarters, I need a 7 and an 8 for G and H. Okay, now I'm in the general headquarters. And if I want to see battlefields, it's a B and an F. So B is a 2 and F is a 6. And I'm in the battlefields. Go back to general headquarters, 7, 8. And back to the lobby, it's a C, W and L is a C and a D. That's a 8 and 4. And if I want to see other projects, oh is number 15. So I type these four buttons at once and you could hold down one and then get the other buttons in and then release them all. That's what the release of all buttons signals, the key and P is a 16. And now I'm at the other projects. If you're interested in learning more about Muse technology and its history, here is some information of how you can create your own Muse and how you can connect to an existing Muse that is still online. And this is a nice one because it also has a game play through the web. So here we are going to connect to a server and you can create a new character or login as a guest and play with it. So if you want to learn more about mud technology, I have a playlist. And starting with this video, exploring the mud from the 1990s, creating your own mud, running your own personal copy of micro Muse and multi user dungeons for education. Because these were actually used in classrooms. If you want to keep up with future research that I'll be doing about Douglas Engelbert systems and how we can revitalize them. This is a tool called Workflowy, which is an outliner on the web and it's pretty nice the way you can collapse and look at the different things and add links and hashtags. So have fun.