 Ted Nelson is a visionary who imagined the ideas of Heikber text in the 1960s and they were much grander than what we currently have now in the worldwide web. In this mini-festo, which is from his 1977 book computer, Lib, he explains his thinking that he really wants users to have a clear conception of software. So I'm going to read the first paragraph. My work is concerned principally with the theory and execution of systems useful to the mind and the creative imagination. This has polemical and practical aspects. I claim that the precepts of designing systems that touch people's minds were contents to be shown in them are simple and universal, making things look good, feel right and come across clearly. I claim that to design systems that involve both machines and people's minds is art first, technology second, and in no way a derivative specialty off in some branch of computer science. This panel has some illustrations from papers that Ted submitted to the ACM in 1965. It is here that he first showed the concept of a zippered list, which is fundamental to the data structure of zigzag, which we will see later. And the middle diagram shows the structure that was used in his job word processor, where Ted's is managed with pointers to spans of characters. So look at this diagram and get an idea of how Ted thinks and is trying to communicate his ideas. In 1967, Ted spent his own money to travel to Brown University and work on a hyper-text editing system known as HES. Now he presented all his ideas about hyper-text with connections to sources, but only in one way jump links were implemented in the system. It was a word processor that ran on an IBM mainframe, and if you look at the picture, it had extra buttons on the side for certain functions and it had a light pen. So this was the first time anything like a word processor had been shown and the managers just weren't ready for advanced hyper-text ideas at the time. But Ted believed that it could have been done and should have been done. In the early 1970s, Ted built a cardboard model of a computer screen that showed his vision of connecting text across different documents. For example, a footnote in a paper could be connected to the source and the reader would be able to see the source quote in context. Ted tried to communicate his ideas to the professional computer development community at the time. You can see one of his lecture handouts on the left. And his major influential book was Computer Lib and Dream Machines. And he laid out a vision for how computers should be used. And they were first coming out as little redboard computers that hobbyists built at that time. And it actually inspired Steve Wozniak to build the Apple One. Now, in his book he describes a system which is a word processor designed for authors called Jock. And his ideas of how authors should be able to easily move text around and rearrange it was documented. Ted designed a language he called Lollipop for specifying how the Jock system should behave when different keys were pressed. So he drew these Lollipop diagrams which show the keys and on the left what conditions or modes that the computer would be in and how it should behave on the right. So this is just a sample of his specification for the Jock system. Now what I'm trying to show on the right is how Ted envisioned that ideas could be connected. So from that Lollipop in flow chart there's a flow chart of his Jock system where he's trying to show all the paths that the system can go through. And then above it is a user manual from the Apple version of Jock. So from time perspective the Lollipop, the diagram is from the 1970s, 71. And then 72 is the flow chart of Jock. 1982 is the Jock user manual and then there's an article in Creative Computing that he wrote which included information about Jock in November 1980. So this illustrates his vision of being able to connect all the sources of material together in a logical way. And on the back of this exhibit is a 1986 right up of the Apple conversion of Jock and the commands that are used. And then I made a comment about it where I found that the actual commands are different than what is printed in that document. Ted coined the word inter-twingle to represent how everything is connected in some way in many ways that we may not even be aware of. Ted's ideal system for managing text he named Zanadu and over the years he's had several versions of it to demonstrate these concepts. The Zanadu plastic system which is shown here comparing the first draft and the formal version of the Declaration of Independence was a complete implementation of his ideas and he's showing how the parts that are the same in both versions are connected and run as transplusions and the differences are very easy to see it they're highlighted on the screen in different colors. Douglass invented the mouse and gave him impressive demo in 1968. He was really showing how documents could be shared and edited across a network. It was a smart internet at that time. Douglass's ideas were used by Xenerox Park in the development of the graphical user interface controlled by M.S. And the picture at the bottom of this panel shows how a hard drive containing a smart truck image of that graphic user interface was found in a dump and brought back and preserved so you could get an idea of what the graphical user interface looked like at the time. The main idea of Ted's Zanadu system is visible connection of writing to its sources and there are several demos that show different ways that this can be done. Currently there are versions which implement some features of Zanadu but not a lot of them and they've been coined Ted Nelson documents. Ted's vision of the zigzag system is a way of connecting cells in multiple dimensions following rules. So it's like an extension of a spreadsheet but it has very interesting properties for navigation and switching dimensions in and out of your view. For example, this picture shows how the monarchs of Europe can be represented in a family tree which emerges as a result of the data in the zigzag system because the latest system connected across several dimensions. The zigzag system also has programmability using cells which are on certain dimensions which represent functions to be applied to other cells in the system. And actually the Zanadu space demo uses zigzag behind the scenes to implement the linking of the source documents. So thank you for your interest in this exhibit. Please pick up a handout for more information.