 Welcome to the DZEZE Show. I'm Eric Rangel, reminding you to be positive as we explore the ideas of Ted Nelson and dream about building a better metaverse. In today's episode, we are going to create a test case for a decentralized version of Ted Nelson's ZZE structure. We are going to use this prototype where you could download the ZZE starter kit and you will get ZZEZ, which you can use to follow along with the example we are going to build. The test case we are going to build is how to store information about patterns in the game of life. Here is an example of the game of life running where it just follows simple rules for every cell and then as the generation's advance you get interesting patterns like this glider and above is a glider gun. We are going to start with a simple example which can actually be emulated on the internet archive at archive.org slash details slash vn Conway. Conway is the inventor of the game of life which came from an article that was published in the Scientific American in 1970, which was first introduced to the world. So I am booting an Apple 2E disk image in archive.org. We are back in 1983 Apple DOS and it is executing a text file which is running an Apple soft basic program which simulates a von Neumann machine. Now it is going to load the program that I developed with numbers and these 10 up codes and I am just going to run it for you. Here is the data. We are going to take a 3x3 grid of numbers either 0 or 1 and figure out how many neighbors each number has. So I am going to modify memory first and create a nice little life pattern. So address 17 and 1 is 0 and address 19 and 0 and 28 and 29. So this code image is designed to read a 3x3 block of cells in the game of life and in this example I have the lighter pattern in these cells that are marked with a 1. And all that this program is going to do is calculate the number of neighbors for each cell. So I am going to run it. And the next generation of this pattern is based on the number of neighbors each cell has. So it is using an algorithm which is defined by these instructions and all these numbers to calculate the number of neighbors. So this middle cell has 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 neighbors. The bottom cell here has 3 neighbors. This one only has 1 neighbor. And then the rules of the game are if you are alive and you have 2 or 3 neighbors you will survive to the next generation. If you are not alive but you have exactly 3 neighbors you will be born in the next generation. So this program is going through and it turns out you only need to calculate this diamond for this 3x3 grid. Okay so now the program just stopped and then you have to manually evaluate the rules. So to figure out which cells will survive to the next generation. So looking at the results of this cell here only has 1 neighbor so it is going to die. So I am going to modify address 18 to be a 0. Okay this cell is alive and it has 2 neighbors. This one has 2 neighbors it will stay alive but this cell over here is going to die. Okay so then 39. Look at a 0. But this cell down here has exactly 3 neighbors. Now this cell here is dead but it has exactly 3 neighbors. So it is going to come alive. 29. The game of life is a mathematical abstraction and it is played on an infinite grid of cells. Well here we have 9 cells but the next generation can only affect cells within this diamond. So if we think about 9 which is 3x3 and 5x5 or 25 then we would add up to the length and square it to figure out the number of cells that we would need to calculate. So a 5x5 grid we would need a 7x7 grid and to calculate around but we do not have to calculate the corners. So if you think about it this 3x3 to go from 3x3 to 5x5 it is like having a snake. So like if we numbered our cells here starting in the middle 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 and then we go out to 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, up to 25 it is like a snake going around and around and that could be a linear structure. And that is what we are going to model in zigzag. How we could theoretically calculate an infinite grid of the game of life. So the cell below this one will get a 1 and this is the pattern that we are going to see in the next generation. So if you wanted to play it out on this grid you would move everything up one. So we would put in 1701 and then 1901 and then we move this row up to the second row. So we are going to set 28 to a 1 and 29 to a 0 and then the third row we would have that one cell down here. So we are going to make 37 into a 0 and leave that one. So that is the pattern for the second generation and then we could run it again, up and then calculate the third generation. And it turns out that the third generation is a glider in a different orientation. So what we want to have in our zigzag structure is all the data necessary to calculate from one generation to the next generation of a cell, group of cells defined in a snake pattern. Okay, so this is the zigz prototype and what I did is open up the edit hack by typing 9 capital G enter and that gives me a place to edit the contents of the blue cell. So if I type my name in here it goes into the contents of that cell. Okay, but I'm going to hit escape because what we want to do is create our own little test case area. So I'm going to create a new cell above the royal families of Europe and I'm going to name it Conway. So I'm going to type in here Conway, GOL, Game of Life. So that's a test case that I want to create. And now I'm going to create a new cell to the right of it. So I have to click in here new L. And now I can start with a little clean slate to define my dimensions and any documentation. But the first dimension that I'm thinking of is a snake. So D dot snake. Now that's not actually creating a dimension in zigzag to do that. I'm going to hit escape and go down to the dimension lists. Now you need D12 and three, but what I'm going to do is insert above D date. So I'm going to create a new cell above it. And I'm going to call this one. So it's D dot GOL dot snake. And I'm using GOL as a name space or game of life that will tell me that will differentiate between my dimensions and the standard dimensions that are already in the system. Now let's create a new cell below it. And we're going to have like a horizontal and vertical view. So I'm going to just call it D. Go that X axis. And another dimension D. Go that Y axis. Okay, because I want them to be independent of the standard dimensions. I consider those useful just for navigating to find your stuff. And let me add those dimensions to it below. Okay, so for consistency, I should rename these to. So this cell, I'm going to name D dot GOL dot X axis. I'm going to go up here, rename this just to put the name space in. Okay, and go down. Okay, I inserted in the middle and I actually want that below it. I'm going to do a hop. So hop this cell over the one below it. And it goes down there. And I'm going to do a D goal dot Y axis. Okay, so let's start with the snake. Well, we're going to start in the middle cell, which would be the zero comma zero in Cartesian toward NITS. But I'm just going to use natural numbers. So I'm going to make a new cell to the right of it. Okay, so actually, yeah, I want these are the cells that are going to be on the dimension. So right now I'm putting them on D1, but I'm going to put them on the D goal snake. So let's start with the number one. Let's just do one through nine. Okay, nine cell snake. Okay, and we'll go to two. Actually, I'm going to put the numbers one through 25 and then we'll work with that. Okay, so we've just created 25 cells, but they're all on dimension one. They're not on the snake dimension yet. So the next thing I want to do is connect this cell one to the snake dimension. Actually, what I want to do is connect this cell from D1 to the cell one, but in the snake dimension. Okay, so what I've done here is put the young green cursor on the cell one, which is currently in dimension one. And I change the x axis here to dimension game of life snake. And I want to connect this cell to this cell. So I do a slash L. And then that puts this cell that's on the green cursor into the dimension game of life snake. And I'm going to do that for the others. So I'm going to navigate on the left to the two and on the right here. So I want to make a rank going forward. And I'm just going to put the first nine cells on the snake. Okay, so let's do a connect to the right. Okay, and the same thing connect to the right. Okay, so now I have the 25 numbers on the snake dimension. Okay, so think of it as the snake wrapping itself around a tail. Okay, but now what I want to do is define. So we're going to now put these cells that are on the snake dimension into the x axis and y axis. So starting in the center, I want the one to be connected. So what I'm going to do is change my x dimension here to the x axis. And what I want to connect is in the left pane, I want dimension one to be the snake dimension. So I'm going to go back to the number one. And I'm going to change the x to the snake dimension. Oops, and do shift x to three and the snake. Okay, so what I want is the x axis to start with a one, which is the middle cell. So, and I'm going to do the y axis as well on dimension. Okay, on the right, I'm going to change the y axis to dimension y axis. Okay, so the one is going to be the first cell on the x axis and y axis. So I'm going to do a connect to the right. And if I move here, this is also on the y axis. So I'm going to connect the same cell below. So it is on the y axis. So then if I change my x to the y axis, it's interesting. Okay, pointing to itself. But what I want to do is go to the right. So cell two is to the right of the one. So I'm going to connect the two to the right on the x axis. Okay, so now we're going to go vertically and connect the three below the two. So this is the functionality that any zz structure should have. So the ability to create cells create dimensions and put cells on dimensions connected. Following the rules. Creating ranks. So now I'm going to create a vertical rank from two to three. Going from the on. Okay, so taking the three from the snake dimension and putting it on the y axis. And then every dimension, the snake is just the convenience, which I'll use for navigating around as I'm calculating. Okay, so now let's do a new cell below it, the three. Now we don't want a new cell. We want to do a slash and below. Okay, so now we have the y axis has a rank going from two to three. And just think of it as a line segment with two points at two and a three. And the fact that we're looking at it vertically doesn't matter. It's just a sequence of points nodes connected by line. So it's also a breath. So now let's go left. So we're going to on the x axis. I'm going to create a rank going in the nigh word direction, the negative. So we're going to go to the four on the right and connected to the left slash J creates it there. Okay, so now let's go left again. Now what we're going to do is put the five to the left of the four slash J. Okay, now I'm going to then go up. And I'll show you something interesting in a minute. So let's do a new cell. The six is above it. Whoops, I didn't want a new cell. So I'm going to hit the apostrophe to excise it. Okay, so I want to slash connect to the cell six. Now let's navigate. I'm going to go down. Okay, over here. Okay. So here I can navigate down. I can navigate left. I can navigate up. Okay, you'll see this better when we have the rest of them. Okay, now I'm going to connect the seven. Whoops, slash you. Okay, let's do eight and nine. Okay, now watch how this works as I navigate. I'm in a row view. So it's showing the rows and then the y-axis is any cells connected and then going in a row view to the left. So the y-axis from two goes down to three, but two is not connected to nine yet. So now if I go down to three, we're going to walk over. Now this four, it's only connected on the left and the right. See, there's no cell above the four. So now we go to the five. It has a cell above it on the y-axis in the nighword direction. Now, yeah, so positive and negative on the y-axis are reversed from partesian. So like this is going negative and this is going positive. Okay, so. So notice this navigation structure in row view. Okay, so then we could see this cell five, which is called the occursed cell. And row view shows all the rows to the right of it. And then the y-axis going up. So we need to be able to navigate to cells like this. And the data structure should make this easy and quick. Okay, so now six is connected vertically and we're in row view. So we're showing the rows. Now seven is connected. It's a corner here. And we go to the right here. And that's all we have so far. The line's not connected to anything yet, but we could get back here to the one. Okay. Let's look at the column view. I'm going to change the view on the right to column. Now we're primarily looking at columns. So we're on this x-axis. Now here is a cell two that has a neighbor below it in a column. And then when I move down here, it's going to show the row. But as it finds the row, it's going to show any columns that are connected to it. So here seven has connections on the x-axis. So it shows it there. It's just a different way of structuring, of displaying the data. And that's a thing that's very important is that the view is just a presentation layer. The data never changes underneath it. So there are other views like a vanishing view, which is nice to see as you're walking through here. So you can see the snake a little better. And then there's stretch vanishing, which just makes the width of the cell hit the text. So as I walk here, one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine. So you can see the snake. Okay. Let's go back to row view. Okay. Now, in the game of life, I want a cell to be easily navigable to its neighbors. So like this one on the x-axis, I could get to the two, but I also want to be able to get to this six. Okay. So from the six, I want to be able to get to the one on the x-axis. I'm going to move my green cursor back to the one. Okay. And I'm going to slash L to connect the six to the one. Okay. So now from the one, I could see the six and I could see the two. Now on the vertical axis, I want the one to be able to see who's above it. So who is above the one? So the four is below it and the eight is above it. Okay. So what I want to do is connect the one to the four below it. So slash comma. And then I want to see just the eight above it. And then I want to go back to the one. Okay. Slash I. Okay. So the other point of zigzag is the user should be able to make any arbitrary connections among the cells in any dimension as long as they follow the rule. The rule is that each cell can only have a left partner on a right partner. So the one in the x-axis dimension can only have a left in the right. And the y-axis can only have this. And in the snake dimension, you can see that it has a left here and a right here to the two. Now let's just do this for each cell to find. Make sure that they're connected in the x and y axes. So on the two, I need to connect it above to the nine. And then I need to move the green cursor to the nine and connect it above. Okay. The three is already connected. The four. Oh wow. Look at that. So. The one is connected to the eight bones. So you can have rings. Look at that. Okay. So I'm just surprising things that you find as you work with this. So I'm on the blue cursor. The four has its vertical neighbors. So starting at one, the four has a one. And I think there was an inadvertent. I did. All right. Okay. I broke the connection that was below it, because I didn't want that. There was an extraneous connection. Okay. So the four is already connected. The five is already connected. The six is connected. The seven and eight and nine. But from the eight, can you get down? Yeah. The nine you can get down. Okay. So now we have our numbers in the snake. And we can, yeah, imagine that we put a glider. One, two, these five cells here, you would make a glider. Now, let's continue expanding the grid. So following the snake pattern going to the right and the round, we're going to go up to 25. So the next cell 10 has to be to the right of it. Okay. And then we're going to, 11 is below it. Okay. Now just for orientation, say that, so the nine is the top. Then the 12 would be the third cell. And then the 13 below it. Okay. So the 12 has to go below the 11. And the 13 goes below there. Okay. Now we're going to go left the 14. We're going to connect left. Whoops. Undo. 14 connect left. And then the 15. Okay. We need five cells down here. 16. And 17. And we're going to up four cells, 18. Okay. So we ultimately need to connect all these cells. But notice the same navigation. So like starting here, we could get to 10. So we can go around. And then we could get down here. And then we'll get to that corner. We can see the top. So this is an arbitrary structure called the snake. I'm calling it a snake. It's connecting this three by three bridge to all the cells that need to be evaluated in order to determine the number of neighbors. That's cells. So let's do these connections. So I'm going to connect 11 to the left. But what is on the left? It's the number two. So let's go back on the x cursor to a two. And go here to 11 and connect left. Okay. So you can get to from the 11 to a two. Now notice how when I go here, the cells that are available pop in. And let's look at it in column view. Okay. View is column. Okay. 11, 12, 13. And then you can see that. Okay. So that's a test case. The navigation in the snake structure. Which will get you a lot of value. And then connecting from a cell. Here. So from the 12, we actually want to connect to a three. So being able to navigate like this. And connect to the left. Okay. Now we're going to see from the 13. We can only get to those two cells. But from the 14, we want to go up to the three. So I want to be able to connect up. So see I could connect to the three. This is in a different dimension. So this 12 is connected to the three in the x-axis. And the 14 is connected to the three in the y-axis. So these cells need to behave this way where any cell can be connected in. Any dimension. So here this x-axis can connect it here. And here the y-axis can connect it here and here. Okay. Let me finish this. So we want the four to be above the 15. Then we want the five to be above the 16. Okay. And then we want the 18 to be on the right. And so like from the five, we, okay, let's just do it make it easy. We're going to create connect to the right on the x-axis. Okay. So like to find the neighbors of five, you would check the nine cell, the eight cells around it. So you'd go up, you'd go down. Okay. So we have to finish this first. Let's connect this to the six. Okay. So let's look at that example again to find the neighbors of five in the y-axis. You go up and you go down. And then in the x-axis, you go right and you go left. And then you choose one of the directions. So say you chose x. You want to go up and down in the y-axis from that cell. And then from the negative cell here, you want to go up and down. And here up is negative and down is positive. Okay. So 18, neg word gets you 19, 18, pause word goes to 17. Okay. Because if you did that, interesting. I'm not counterintuitive. So from this 20, you want to get to the seven. From the 21, 21's already fully connected. 22, we want to get down to the seven. So we're going to connect it down. So beautiful, how the things fly in. So it looks like a spreadsheet, but it's not a spreadsheet. It's a snake, a snake sheet. Okay. 23. See, I can't go down yet, but I could connect it to the eight. Down. So there needs to be logic. If you build this game of life that when you create a new wrap around snake, you need to go around that snake and connect it to the cells. So you need like two pointers following the cells. Like you appoint your here, we follow these going down around. And then you connect the cells here around it to the pointer here. So like you get to the 24, your other person would be on the nine. So you're you put that there. And then you connect down. So that's creating a link. Okay. And then the last one. I'm going to link down to the 10. Okay, good. So look what we have a navigable five by five grid. Okay, so this is a good test case for seeing if your system can do this. Okay. So this will allow us to. So the API functions that you would need in this structure, you need to get the status of a cell if it's alive or dead. So like say I put a star to indicate it's alive. So like I'm just doing this as an example here. So say I want to make a glider. So this would have a status of a live. And then the six needs a status of a live. And then the five, four and three. Okay. Okay. So this status could be another dimension pulled generation. So like generation zero can be this snake with these statuses. Then generation one would be after you calculate the neighbors to show the new pattern. The next phase of the glider. And that could be a generation. You did that to pause word in the generation direction. So it's another copy of the snake. Now when your snake grows beyond the five by five matrix, you would need to go to the next level of the snake and then create 26 going all the way around to 49. Okay. So I'm going to stop with this structure and then go to a spreadsheet to show how I envision it could be created in. A decentralized data structure as a test case for the system we're building. Okay.