 Welcome to the DZEZE Show. I'm Eric Rangel, reminding you to be positive as we explore the ideas of Ted Nelson and dream about building a better metaverse. Welcome to another episode of the DZEZE Show. Here we are looking at a Zoom meeting from the 1960s, which we are going to use as an example for the DZEZE Show. This spreadsheet shows the people who are in the Brady Bunch family and we're going to start with Alice at the center. What I want to point out is that dimensions can have no logical reasoning. It's like I could create a dimension called Peter, Carol, Marsha and Greg. So let's start with Alice. If we wanted to go around and make a snake, we could go from Alice to Peter or any of the other people, but let's just choose Peter as a start and then we're going to go down and around. So when we go to Peter, let's fill Peter in and then we want to go down to Bobby and then across to Mike and Cindy and fill them and then up to Jan and Marsha. Okay, and over to Carol and Greg. Okay. So think about this as the game of life. So here is Conway's Game of Life and let's draw a glider. Let's make this a 1, 0, 0, 0. So if you use the Brady Bunch cells as the game of life to calculate the next generation, you have to count the number of neighbors that each cell has. So Alice has six neighbors. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Why? Oh, I didn't recalculate. And when you, yeah, so like as I moved in this neighbor count cell, you could see which cells are dependent on each other. Okay, so like down here, you only need these three cells and Alice depends on everybody around her. And then it calculates a generation, which is a glider pointing down and then it gets another neighbor count and gets the next generation. So each generation is a pure function. So when you're calculating the generations, you're comparing these two numbers, the previous and the current neighbor count and using rules to determine what goes where, which cells are turned on or off. And then counting neighbors here, if you still have a three by three, okay, here we had to expand the grid a little bit. But still you can see the pattern of dependencies. It's a square showing all your neighbors. Okay, but putting that aside, let's go back here and say we just wanted a zzz structure to figure out where our neighbors are. So I created a dimension. Yeah, so theoretically let's have a dimension called Peter for horizontal connections and a dimension Carol for vertical connections, just arbitrary choosing people. Marsha for diagonals that go this way and Greg for diagonals that go this way. So with those four dimensions, I can navigate one or negative one or negative one and find all of Alice's neighbors. Okay, so let's look at each of these dimensions. The dimension snake starts at Alice, then goes right to Peter, then down to Bobby and around to Greg. Now dimension Peter, it will have three different ranks, Marsha's Carol, Greg, Jan, Alice, Peter and Cindy, Mike, and Bobby. So these are just lines. So there. So the important thing is that if you go left of Marsha, that's a nil cell or no cell. If you go right of Greg, that's a nil cell in that dimension. So these are three disconnected ranks in a horizontal dimension Peter. And for the vertical connections, it also has three ranks. You got Marsha, Jan, Cindy, Carol, Alice, Mike and Greg, Peter, Bobby. Okay, so that's also clear from the diagram. Now the Marsha dimension is for diagonal connections on a backslash. Now you have Marsha, Alice, Bobby, but you'll have Carol, Peter and Jan to Mike. So those are three ranks. Okay, and here's the diagram for the Marsha connections. So there's one rank here, one rank here, and one rank here. And the Greg dimension is for the Greg, Alice, Cindy, the Carol, Jan and the Peter, Mike, ranks. Okay, so this should clear up the concept of ranks between dimensions. Okay, so in the rest of this video, I'm going to show how a relational database structure can store all the information to maintain a zz structure. And I'm not going to discuss any implementation details. You could use any technology to implement this. But the one thing I want to point out is the concept of a tumbler as a permanent address of a cell. So wherever it could be one infinite loop in California. Okay, so tumblers are defined as a sequence of numbers that start with a non zero. And I'm also adding the condition that they end with a non zero. The last digit would never be zero with as many intermediate dotted numbers in between as you want. Okay, so with a table of cells dimension and cell connections within dimensions, that will maintain bidirectional links through logic. We can store everything we need to create these dimensions and navigate between them. Okay, so let's look at how we would implement this in gzz. Okay, so I've just created a gzz canvas and I created a place where I created a dimension called Brady snake. So as we defined the snake previously, it goes from Alice to Peter, Bobby. Okay, so over to Peter down to Bobby, left to Mike, left to Cindy, up to Jan, up to Marsha, right to Carol, Greg. And that's the end of the Brady people. And then if we continue it, we would have cells that I'm just numbering 10 through 25 to make a 5 by 5 bridge. Okay, now every one of these cells exists in every dimension, any cell in a zz structure exists in every dimension. So like Alice is in the royal families of Europe, obviously. Okay, so now let's go to our edit window. It says 9 capital G. Okay, and move it down here so we could change Alice's name if we wanted to. But for now, what we want to do is follow the spreadsheet and create the zzz structure that is illustrated in this spreadsheet numbers. Okay, so we've created cells, but let's look at what we would do. So starting from scratch, we create a cell for Alice. And arbitrarily picking the tumbler of 2.0, it could be anything. But we have to give the cell an ID. So Alice is number one and version one. If we change her name later, we would have a new version of the cell. And that's a permanent address, which points to anything, the file, a picture. Okay, and we are going to create a new dimension dimension ID one is cell ID 2, which is a dimension called snake. So I chose to use the tumbler 1.0.1 for the dimensions. So anything under 1.0 is a dimension. So dimension Peter is 2, 3, 4. Okay, so say we just needed to create those two. So I'm going to highlight the rows that I create as we go. So we want to start with these two and this first dimension. Okay. So the cell ID of the dimension will point to the cell that defines the dimension. So if we need to rename this to Brady snake, we could change the contents at this address and it would have a new name. But we want to keep every version. So that would be a version two of this cell ID 2. That's the primary key. Okay, and the primary key of the dimension, we could have versions of the dimension table. So like say we renamed snake, we would have version two of dimension one, which would also have cell ID 2. But it could point to a different cell ID theoretically. Okay, the data that we want to use going forward is in here, the connections between cells within dimension. So the first thing we want to do is on the snake, we want an Alice going positive in the positive direction to Peter and negative and then the Peter cell going negative to Alice. So we also need Peter. So let's add the creation of Alice and Peter. So there are no connections until you have at least two cells. So let's fill Peter. Okay, so say we've created these three cells, Alice and Peter and it's in the snake dimension. So all we are showing here is this link between Alice and Peter. Okay, so all we do, all we're creating here is this little line connecting them in this Brady snake dimension, which I call just desnake in the spreadsheet. Okay, so how would we do that in a table? Okay, so we have to connect Alice positive to Peter and so the positive and negative are just directions. So this is a directed graph. Okay, so dimension ID 1 points to this cell ID 2, which is the name of dimension snake. So we are connecting in dimension snake cell ID number 1, which is Alice and version 1. Okay, so you'll see versioning later as we supersede data in these cells later, but we're starting with version 1. Now the negative cell ID currently Alice has no negative neighbor, even though I needed to attach it to something just ignore this cell for now. So Alice has a nil as for left neighbor and Peter has a nil in his right neighbor. So that's where you see nil in the negative cell and nil in the positive self or Peter. So the positive cell ID is 3. Okay, so 3, you could go back and look up that's Peter. So this first row, it's connecting Alice and then going positive to Peter in dimension snake. Okay, so we understand that. That's highlighted. Okay, now also in dimension snake, we need Peter to have a negative connection to Alice. So in dimension 1, cell ID 3. Okay, dimension 1 is still the snake cell ID 3 is Peter and we have a version 1 going negative to 1, which is Alice. So that's how we capture that relationship. So yeah, I'm just going to keep the, so whatever is filled in, we've visited already. Okay, so we've handled these two rows. So these two rows will need to be inserted as a logical unit of work that either both rows get inserted successfully or none of them and you roll back your application handles the exception. Okay, so now what's the next thing we want to create? We go to dpter. So, okay, so now we are going to add a dimension called dpter. So let's do that in zigzag by hitting escape and scrolling down. This is Ted Nelson's zigzag prototype, but this is GZZ. So we created dimension Brady snake. We're going to create a new dimension going connecting down to from Brady snake and we're going to call it dpter. Okay, so again, you could call things whatever you want. There's no rule. You're making the rules as you go. Okay, so now I'm going to here set my x axis to d Brady snake and my y axis to dpter. Okay, so what is dpter? Well, looking back here, that's we want to create the dimension in dpter that Alice is to the left of peter and peter is to the right of Alice where Alice is peter going neg word and peter is Alice going pause word. Okay, so to create a new dimension, we need to insert a row in the dimension table, but we need this reference is sell ID for. So we need to create the sell for the new dimension. Okay, and we need to let's see what we can do. Yeah, and then we need to create the dimension entry. So it's a so the these first these IDs are auto incrementing fields. So this is the first version of dimension number two, which is pointed to sell for which is the peter dimension. Now, let's talk about the tumbler. So as a convention, I want so I decided that I want my tumblers to maintain an alphabetical sorted tree. So as I'm inserting peter, I want it to be where you could navigate in order of the tumblers. So like 2.0 goes from a to p 2.1, but then Bobby, I want to insert between Alice and peter. So by going 2.0, 2.0.1 and 2.1, I could traverse that tree in order of the tumblers and get an alphabetical index. But that's just what I chose. It's like a clustered index. Okay, in a database sense, but just consider the tumbler permanent address of a sell for now. It's up to you how you organize it physically. So this could represent directories on a disc. Like maybe you have a hyper drive and a directory called to an under you have a zero directory and a one directory and then under the zero directory, you create a file to that 0.1 or a directory to that 0.1, you could explore those ideas and might get hub. Okay, so let's see what we want to do with dpeter. So now we want to on dpeter, we want to go from Alice, pause word to peter. So in dimension peter, sell one is Alice version one. So see every cell exists in every dimension, but now we're creating a connection. So we store all the connections between cells. So we want to go positive to 3. Okay, so let's highlight this. Okay, and let's make that connection. Okay, so in dpeter, we want to go connect, we want Alice going down to peter in this dimension. So in the left panel, what I want to do is navigate to my Brady snakes. Let's make the shift X to dimension Brady snake. And let's go to peter. Okay, and let's connect with the slash. So slash comma connects dpeter. Let's see. Okay, so what we want to do first, I'm making sure I'm in row view and Brady snake is this X dimension and peter is the Y dimension. So I've highlighted Alice with the blue cursor and peter with the green cursor in the left window. And I'm going to make a connection going in the vertical dimension of dpeter. So I want to connect Alice going, pause word to peter in the peter dimension. So I type slash comma and that creates this link. So on dpeter, Alice is connected to peter and peter is connected to null and Alice is connected to null, nighword. And then you can see the Brady snake dimension going here Alice goes to peter goes to Bobby. So gzz draws a spline, which is a quadratic or cubic equation that is used to calculate the pixels for a curve. Okay, so that's the first connection. And then we need peter going negative to Alice. Well, we've already that's implied in the zz structure that peter going negative to Alice. So like if I do comma, that's going down in the y axis, which is going pause word in dpeter. And if I type in i, I go up in the y axis, which is going nighword in dpeter. And then I can't go up and I can't go further down. But in a database, we need to explicitly create the two rows together. So here we're saying dimension two has a, yeah, so the cell ID three peter version one has a negative partner at one Alice. Okay, so let's highlight that. Okay, we're done with that link. Okay, so now we are going to create Bobby. Okay, so we need to add cell ID five for Bobby, which we've already done in the exact gz. Okay, so, so Bobby is cell five, I explained the tumbler already. And we're not creating a new dimension yet, but we want to add Bobby to the snake. So peter needs a positive connection to Bobby. So we're in dimension one, which is the snake cell three is peter and version two, because we've already used version one here, we have a connection between peter and Alice. So what we need to do is copy whatever we had first, we have a one in the negative cell, and now we're adding a five in the positive cell to replace this nil. So that is an insert of a copy of a row. Okay, so that we maintain the relationships. So now watch what we can do. We can go from peter to Bobby, and we can go back from peter to Alice. So in dimension one cell one is delactive, and that is the cell ID one is Alice, and then we can go forward from Alice to three. So we can look up one three, and you get to the cell ID three is peter, and then if you want to go forward again, you can go to the pause cell ID five, and one five. Okay, so where is one five? It's going to be here, which is Bobby. So you know, these have to be created in pairs, otherwise you don't have a valid structure. Okay, one five is Bobby, and we haven't created dimension Bobby yet. So let's hide. So for Bobby, the negative cell is three for peter, and it has no positive neighbors, so we'll highlight that. Okay, the blue just means that later on this is going to get replaced by a new version because in the snake Bobby has another partner going around, which would be Mike over here. So we haven't gotten there yet, but we've done this. So what have we done? We've always done is we've connected our snakes. So if you imagine that we only had two people in the snake, we added Bobby to the snake, and we created this link. Okay, next. Okay, by adding Bobby, we actually have three cells, and what I want to do as I create these cells, I want to capture all relationships. So we saw that Alice and Peter have a relationship. Boy, in the Peter dimension, and now Peter and Bobby have a relationship in the Carol dimension. So what we need to do is create a dimension for Carol, and add a relationship. Peter, pause word to Bobby and Bobby, and beg word to Peter. So that's the next step we have to create a new dimension for Carol. Okay, and now we have to find a Tumblr to store Carol. Well, by for dimensions, by using this convention, it's just going to increase the third digit of the Tumblr for each new dimension. So four or five, et cetera. Okay, so we create dimension three pointing to cell six, which is the name D Carol. Okay. All right, we have three dimensions. Now what we need to do is connect the cells. Three is the Carol dimension, and we're connecting three and five, which is Peter and Bobby. Double check it here. Three is Peter. Five is Bobby. Okay, so Peter going positive to Bobby and Bobby going negative to Peter. Okay. So with this table so far, you can navigate Alice, Peter, Bobby in three different dimensions. And that's the idea of these structures, whatever dimensions you want. And you have to think about the design of your application and what kind of structure would best support it. And these next cell IDs and pause cell IDs are not part of the key because there is a rule in ZZ structure that within any dimension, any cell can only have one negative and one positive part. Partner or neighbor, okay, negative neighbor and a positive neighbor. So in any dimension, any cell can only have one negative neighbor and one positive neighbor. If you needed to do a many to many relationship, you would have to create a dimension called declone and connect the cells on the clone dimension and use that clone for navigating to clones of an existing cell. But we're not going to look at that right now. Okay, so what we want to represent now is in dimension, Carol, Peter and Bobby. So we need to create dimension, Carol. So let's go back and go down to the dimension list. After Peter, we're going to do a new going down and we're going to edit the cell to be the Carol. Okay. And then escape and go back up. Okay, so X is the Brady snake and we can go Y is D Peter. But we can also change Y now to D Carol. And we're going to connect Peter down to Bobby in D Carol. So on the left pane, I want to go to dimension Brady snake and go up here. D1, I need to go to the right and then change the X in the left window to Brady snake. Okay. So now I want on the left pane, I want to move the green cursor to Bobby and I want to connect them vertically, which we put them on D Carol. So slash comma, we now have Peter and Bobby connected vertically on D Carol. And what that represents is this link here. Next, we need to create a dimension, Marsha, because we now have an Alice to Bobby relationship. Oh boy, Alice getting around here. Let's go create D Marsha. Okay. So we fill her in with the orange tan. Okay, so we need to create a dimension called Marsha. And that is seven, which becomes the cell ID pointing to dimension four. We create the dimension here. And let's add that dimension to our system. Okay, dimension list. And Marsha. Marsha, Marsha, Marsha. Okay. And let's go back. Okay, so X is the Brady snake and Y is... So Peter, Carol, and Marsha. Now let's look at the left pane and go up and over and change X back to Brady snake. Okay. So who are we connecting? We are connecting Alice to Bobby. So we move to the right on the Alice. So the blue is Alice and the green is Bobby. Okay. So here's the connection in dimension Marsha. Alice is number one and Bobby is number five. So one goes to five and positive and five goes to one in negative. So these two rows we're going to implement. Okay. So here to do that we do a Alice slash comma to connect in dimension Marsha. We're connecting Alice down to Bobby. And that's how it's done. So the Brady snake dimension goes Alice Peter, Bobby, Mike Cindy. But the Marsha dimension goes Alice Bobby. And what is that showing here? Alice to Bobby in the Marsha dimension. Your mind getting twisted a little bit here. Okay. Now we're going to add Mike. And we have to add him to the snake and then we have to do a few more things for Mike. Okay. So Mike, his tumbler, we need to insert an M into this alphabetical list. So he's after Bobby, but before Peter. So 202 becomes his tumbler. Okay. So imagine a directory structure. You create two subdirectories and then you put a picture of Mike in there as an example. Okay. Now we have to connect Mike into the system. It's just creating the cell. It's not connected to anything. So you need some place to put new cells. And in GZZ there is a cell creation dimension for that for things that are may not be connected to anything else. So adding Mike, who is number eight. We need to, let's see, snake. We need to find he's going to be after Bobby in the snake. Because looking here he's Bobby going, we're going left, but we're going Pazward in snake. Okay. Get that snake goes from here to here to here to here. Okay. So Bobby paused to Mike. So 5 is Bobby and Paz to Mike and 5 version 2. So where was 151? We had a 3. We have to obsolete this row and create a version 2 of this 15. And we will now do this. So like in a relational database you could have a view that always shows the latest version of these two cell combinations. But implementation details are not going to be discussed here. You could have other columns for back pointers or other stuff. That's for your programming experts for performance tuning. So we don't want to optimize performance too soon. We don't want to prematurely optimize. Okay. So D snake, Bobby paused Mike. So Bobby. Okay. So our snake dimension already has that. That's that little line connecting those two cells. And then the Mike negative to Bobby. So dimension one is the snake. And that's the first version of that row. 5 is Bobby and no positive cell yet. Okay. So that's done. Okay. Now by adding Mike, we have what what what do we do when we add Mike? We have a square. We have a carol dimension here. We have a Peter dimension here. And we have a new dimension called Greg for this relationship. So there are three relationships or six rows that we have to add. So Mike had relationships with the whole family. Uh oh. Okay. So I'm going to add dimension Greg first. Okay. 1.0.5. Okay. So we add a new dimension pointing cell nine. So this is the first. So these are our five dimensions that we need for our navigation. Okay. That will allow us to find all neighbors of any cell in the system. Okay. So now Greg. And if you think about the game of life, as we go around and expand this further and further, if we just keep following these rules and creating all the neighbor connections, we will have all the mechanism we need to navigate in any direction for many cell. And to traverse starting at the beginning of the snake to evaluate the game board for the next generation. So let's just follow this through. De-Peter, Mike, pause to Bobby. Okay. In De-Peter. So what we want to do is uh, mic, the blue cursor on mic, and the green cursor is on Bobby. But we want to create the Greg dimension first. So go down here. So if you could think of all your dimensions up front, it might be easier to create them all first. But I'm just showing you as an example, creating as we go. So you can do either way. It's your workflow. All right. New cell comma below it and D mic. No D Greg. Okay. The Greg dimension. Okay. Let's go back and back to where we were. And X is Brady snake. And Y. Let's go to the new dimension. So Peter, Carol, Marsha, Greg. Okay. And who are we connecting? So it's on the X axis. Let's go up to here and X Brady snake. Undo. What we need to do is go back to dimension one. Go around here. Okay. Dimension one. We have to go to the right. And then change X to Brady snake. Now we got him. Okay. So we are going to connect Bobby and Mike. And how are they related? Okay. So the first one we're doing is in the Peter dimension. Okay. So let's scroll this around to the Peter dimension. We'll eventually get to the Greg dimension. So let's do the Y axis all the way around. Okay. Peter dimension. And Mike. Okay. So Mike is going in the password. Wait a minute. Oh, in the Peter dimension. Yes. We are going from Mike, password to Bobby. Because the Peter dimension is horizontal rows. So this is a Negword. And this is Pawsword. So Mike going Pawsword to Bobby and Bobby going Negword to Mike. So in the Peter dimension. And Mike going Pawsword to Bobby is a slash comma. So that establishes that relationship here. Okay. And then in the table. It's eight is Mike. Right. Eight is Mike. And five is Bobby. So dimension two is Peter. And you have eight going to five and five going to eight. So we're done with these two rows. Okay. Now Mike is also connected to Carol. How nice. Okay. So what's this Alice, Paws, Mike and Carol. What are the three of those people doing? All right. So we're not creating a Cindy yet. Where you don't need any new dimensions. We're creating a relationship in the Carol dimension. So looking at the Brady Bunch again. The Carol dimension is vertical. And so far we only have these four cells in our system. So we need an Alice going Pawsword to Mike and a Mike going Negword to Alice. So Alice Paws to Mike and Mike, Neg Alice. So Alice is one Mike is eight. So dimension three is Carol. So we can verify it here. So three goes to six, goes to Carol. Okay. So let's connect these. So we understand what they are now. We'll just highlight what we're doing. Yep. Alice goes to Mike and Mike goes to Alice. And Alice is restaurant or Tom Larersong. Okay. So Alice in dimension Carol. So let's change the y-axis on the right to dimension Carol. And we want Alice Pawsword. So the blue cursor goes to Alice. And the green cursor has to go to Mike. And now we slash down. And now we have on dimension Carol, Alice to Mike. Okay. And we can chug through the rest of these. Now chug is a technical term. It's not about beer. It's about navigating in dimensions. Okay. Greg. In dimension Greg, Mike Paws to Peter and Peter Nick to Mike. So dimension Greg is this diagonal dimension. So Mike Paws to Peter and Nick. So where's Negan Paws? So see, yeah, positive is up, but in this dimension it's in the word. Really, your choice of positive and negative is arbitrary as long as you are consistent. So here I'm saying Mike goes positive to Peter and Peter goes Neg to Mike. So you want to draw a diagram of your directions and your positives and negatives for yourself. The system will do whatever you want, but your brain has to think about what you're doing. Okay. So we chose Mike Paws to Peter and Peter Neg to Mike. So five is dimension Greg, right? Yes. Five, nine, D Greg. Okay. Eight is Mike and three is Peter. Just to verify that. Eight and three. Good. Okay. So what we want to do now is implement this relationship in D Greg, Mike going positive to Peter and Peter going negative to Mike. So Mike is eight. Peter is three. Dimension five is dimension Greg. And here's your eight to three and three to eight. Okay. So we'll color those in and we'll implement it. So Mike and Greg are going Mike down to Peter. Okay. So slash comma. We have that Paws word. Okay. So, but looking at it up here, Mike and Peter is Paws word. Yes. In one sense of the word. Okay. What's next? We have to add Cindy. Okay. So looking at what we have, if we just go around the circle again, all of Mike's connections going back to. Okay. So Mike goes in the Peter dimension, which is horizontal. Mike goes to Bobby in the Carol dimension, which is vertical. Alice goes down to Mike. And in the more, Marsha dimension, he doesn't have one, but in the Greg dimension, Mike goes northeast to Peter. Okay. That's the power of ZZ structure when you can navigate and counterintuitive ways. Okay. So now let's just add Cindy Jan Marsha, Marsha, Marsha. All right. We're going to create Cindy. Now C comes after C a. So, um, okay. We didn't create a Cindy dimension. We're creating a Carol where we haven't put Carol in the system yet. So for the people we have, we have Alice Bobby comes after Bobby. So 2.0.1.1 will be Cindy's tumbler. Okay. Because I'm keeping an alphabetical clustered index. Okay. No new dimensions. Now let's connect Cindy to the snake. Okay. Cindy is cell 10. Okay. Yeah, the cell will get overwritten later, but we're creating it from version 1 to start. So, Mike in the snake dimension goes positive to Cindy. So that is this relationship here between Mike and Cindy. Okay. So let's take this. Okay. So in dimension 1, snake 8 is Mike going positive 10 and 10 is Cindy going there. Cindy going negative Mike. So the viewing of this data is up to you. What we're doing is providing the data structure so you can navigate in any way you choose. And it's up to the, um, GUI designer to figure out how to display this data in a way that makes sense. To be user in the application you're building. So we want to connect this prep. We've already connected that. Now, by adding Cindy, the Peter dimension, the horizontal, we have a Cindy going positive to Mike. So 2 is dimension Peter. 10 is Cindy. First version. 8 is Mike. Now, 2, 8 already existed up here. So we copy 2, 8 version 2. Okay. So we forgot to copy the 5 from here. Okay. So it's easy to make errors here. You're doing things manually like I am. Okay. So what is this saying? A new version of dimension 2 cell 8 has 8 is who? Mike. Mike has a left neighbor of Cindy and a right neighbor of 5, Bobby. Okay. So let's do this in GZZ. Go to D Peter. Okay. Y axis. Okay. I'm going to go around. Okay. In your system, have an easy way of going backwards in dimensions. All right. Depeater. We want to connect. Cindy paused to Mike. So Cindy is the blue cursor. And Mike is the green cursor. Common. Look at that. We have Cindy to Mike to bobby. That connection creates this rank, which is thisrank down here. Okay. You could change your view to column, and look at things differently, but I'm not going to confuse you. the designer as well. If you create the right views, your structure will have natural navigation. Same thing in a database. Creating the right views will make your developers happy, not to think about complex interrelationships and calculations or whatever. Okay, yeah, go to think about functional programming in this type of structure as a research project. Okay, dimension Greg. Greg is a diagonal dimension. Cindy Diagnoli goes to Alice. So looking up here, that's this Cindy going to Alice and eventually to Greg, who doesn't exist yet. Okay, so you can have views of time. See, this is a time-ordered series here. So you should have as a surrogate key that's an auto increment field on this table as well. All right, five to ten. You have dimension five is Greg. Did we do that yet? No. Okay, so let's go to dimension Greg. And ten is Cindy. One is Alice. Okay, and then Alice going negative to Cindy. Okay, so let's do that. Five Greg, Cindy, to Alice. So left cursor and on Greg. Okay, so Cindy going in the Greg, it's posward on Greg gets to Alice and Alice going negative on Greg gets to Cindy. Okay, who are we adding now? Jan. Okay, we're adding Jan into the system. And J comes after C, but before M. So she fits right in there. Two dead zero that one that two. Okay, your clustered index can be anything, but it must represent how you want to physically store the data. So this could be a B tree or any other structure you want. Okay, Jan, not January when you type that in auto corrects to January. So cell 11 is Jan. Okay, so on our snake, we need from ten Cindy positive to 11 Jan and Cindy's left neighbor in snake is eight, which is Mike. So one ten version two, we're copying the eight down and we're adding 11. And then dimension one for cell 11, first version we're going left from Jan to Cindy. That's what these numbers represent. So good mental exercise to keep your brain working. All right, so we're going to be all right from D snake. We've already have that. So we created our snake or this little line between the two cells. Now Peter, we added Jan. So by adding Jan, we have a horizontal relationship. We have a martial relationship. We have a vertical relationship. We don't have a Greg relationship yet. When we get to Carol, we'll create that Greg relationship. Okay, so Jan, in dimension Peter, we want Jan to Alice. Okay, so two is dimension Peter. 11 is Jan. One is Alice. Okay, so here we have a version two of two comma one, which is up here, way back. We have a three. So we copy the three down and we add the 11. Okay, so let's do that. Peter, Jan, pause Alice and Alice and egg Jan. So all this stuff here I'm showing you is a test case that you can build into any ZZ structure that you are building. Okay, and then if you keep going with the game of life, you can create some ZZ cell programming logic and test that. Okay, so Peter or Jan Alice, not Peter Polenmarie, Peter Jan and Alice, a new band. Sunshine day, everybody smiling. Okay, dimension Peter, why I got all the way around again to Peter, which I, you for undo, we'll get you back there. In dimension Peter, Jan goes pause to Alice. So Jan is on Brady Snake and Alice is already connected. So I should come up. Look at this structure here, Bobby Brady, Alice Peter, Jan Alice Peter. What is Jan Alice Peter? That's this horizontal row in the Peter dimension. I could have called it the Jan dimension, but I wanted to balance the women and the men such as this way. I could have gone this way. All right. So we have a nice relationship there. That's a rank and there won't be any cells to the left of Jan or to the right of Peter until we go all the way around and create the 25 five by five cell grid. All right. So we're just going to finish the test out of that we have here. And I didn't go all the way. Okay, so dimension Carol, Jan positive to Cindy. Okay, so we didn't create Marsha. We have dimension Carol, which is dimension three, which you can verify by going back three six six Carol. Okay, so 11 is Jan and to Cindy. So we're going vertically now. So 11 to 10 and 10 to 11. So they're both version one because no other vertical neighbors existed on this left most vertical rank. Okay, so that's what we're going to create. Let's go to the Carol dimension. And the X Y. Brady, Peter, Carol. We want Jan to Cindy. Jan is blue. Cindy is green. And slash comma. Okay, so in Carol dimension, Jan and Cindy are a rank of two cells. And Cindy is next to Jan. Dimension Marsha Jan positive Mike. Okay, do we have Marsha? Of course we do. Jan is connected to Mike in the Marsha dimension like that. The Marsha dimension is this backslash. Okay, so we create that rank Jan to Mike numerically. Dimension four is Marsha. And Jan to Mike is eight and Mike to Jan is 11. So now that we understand that, I like it. Okay, Marsha. Which dimension we're going into dimension Marsha. So Y, Marsha, Jan and Marsha. Oh boy, sibling rivalry. Marsha, Jan positive Mike. So Jan is here and Mike is here. And we have the Marsha dimension Jan to Mike. Marsha. Yeah, so Mike, Nick, to Jan, we got that. Next, we're going to add Marsha to the system. So Marsha, Marsha, Marsha. So two dot zero dot two is Mike. Marsha's before Mike. So we just add a one dot three and we keep that in that index in order. So databases have a balance between index maintenance and other stuff. Okay. Yeah. Because we have too many indexes as you're inserting, you got to maintain every index, every insert. But I've never seen that to be a problem in systems I've worked on. Okay, snake. We've already got it on the snake. So Marsha, the snake. All right, 11. So here's a version two of 11, which was up here. We copied down the 10. We had 12. So that's Cindy to Marsha. No, that's Jan to Marsha. Yeah. So, okay. So Jan's left, Neghward neighbor is Cindy and Jan's positive neighbor is Marsha. And Marsha's left word, Neghward neighbor is 11 or Jan. Got that. Okay. So the snake was already created from Jan to Marsha. Two more in the snake there. Okay. So now, Carol, by adding Marsha, we have a Carol relationship and a Marsha relationship. So Marsha is both a cell and a dimension. And that's seen here. You have a horizontal, which is on the Peter dimension and the vertical on the Carol dimension. Did I get that right? Marsha and Marsha has a Alice. So I forgot to add the deep Peter. Okay. So now we have Marsha. Well, you know, we don't have Carol yet in the system. That's why. Yeah. So currently, we have Marsha in the corner. We have a down and we have a Marsha dimension. So down and diagonal. So there are two that we add at this time. So as an exercise to the reader, you complete the rest of this table. Exercise to the YouTuber. Okay. Dimension three was cell six, which is Carol, which we got right over here. Carol. Marsha is 12 and Jan is 11 and Jan, Negh to Marsha. So Jan is 11 and Negh to Marsha is 12 Pause to Cindy. That was copy. So version two of a 311. So you got to find the 311 here. Copy the 10 down and logically delete. So that's a good idea to use logical deletion for these. So then you could just select the current row, the most recent. And if you need to go back and look at versions, you could save it in an audit trail, whatever you want to do. Okay. So three, whoops. All right. Carol dimension, Marsha to Jan. So let's go to Y. Carol. Peter Carol. Marsha and Jan. Okay. Marsha goes down to Jan and is that pause word? Yeah. Well, based on what I said here, yeah, you have to look at a diagram as you're building this. Okay. So slash comma, Marsha, Jan, Cindy. And that is the vertical rank of the girls. Positive is down opposite of Cartesian coordinates counterintuitive. Okay. Okay. Understand. So we got yeah, Marsha going down to Jan, Jan going backward, Nickward to Marsha. And Marsha pause to Alice in the Marsha dimension. So let's look at that and Marsha dimension change the y-axis to Marsha. And we got to get the Alice cell in green. Alice looks good in green. Today is St. Patti's day. Happy St. Patti's day, Ireland. And what do we got? Marsha Alice Bobby. Look how that all connected up. We have here Marsha Alice Bobby in the Marsha, when we have another Jan dimension, another Marsha dimension. So Alice can find her diagonal neighbor and the other diagonal neighbor. She can use dimension Peter to find Jan and Peter. She can see Mike for now. She doesn't see Carol yet because we didn't create her. And then she'll be able to see Greg. And that is the game of life. The parents and Alice are deceased, but the kids are all in their 60s now. Okay, let's finish this for now. Colorful. Marsha in dimension four, which is Marsha. 12 positive to Alice and Alice Nick to Marsha, which we did here. And that concludes this episode of the DZ Easy Show. Happy coding. The files for this episode can be found in gethub.com slash e-ringel, slash articles. And then you navigate to the DZES test cases directory. So this BradyLife.zip, the contents. If you unzip it, it'll give you the GZZ files. If you want to open it into your own GZZ. The numbers is an Apple spreadsheet for Mac OS. And the PDF is a printout of that spreadsheet. So you could print this out and look at it if you don't have a Mac.