 Welcome to the DZEZE Show where we create the decentralized betterverse using DZES! So Ted, I want to first thank you for communicating your ideas very thoroughly that we can dig deep into them and take them forward and teach them to people. My question is, is it possible to prioritize your innovations in terms of what we should work on first and bring forward or you need them all at once? I have no idea because I don't know what to do. Please go to xanado.com slash demo and play with that. I do have an exhibit with your demos running, so if anybody wants to come and see it. Welcome to the DZEZE Show Episode 3. In this show we're going to explore the initial GitHub repository for DZES. But first I want to show you some things in the hypercorp protocol in the guides. What we looked at previously is the hypercorp CLI. Here you can see the commands grouped by the structures they operate on. We were looking at the hyperdrive commands for cataloging, yet to see a file to put a file to do diffs between directories and L.S. But what we're going to explore further is let's go back. This using hyperspace will help you get started with the DEMON and how to programmatically create the server, implement and connect and access the hyperdrive programmatically. What I want to show you is the standalone modules. Here is hypersmorm is the distributed hash table and core store has a for managing hypercorp. This is another way of getting started programmatically. But hyperdrive is what I'm building upon for DZES. These features are important. Sparse downloading, readers only downloaded the portions of the files they need. Fast lookups, it's a distributed try structure. Version controlling by default and you can even do version tagging now. This walkthrough gives you some examples of how to create a hyperdrive and to when it's ready to get information from it. You can use random access memory for testing and connecting it to hyperspace to get it hosted. Okay, and then how to read and write files in a hyperdrive. There's promises. This is the technical details to get it to work. But what I want to show is this GitHub for hyperdrive to show you all the possibilities. It's a secure real-time distributed file system for P2P file sharing. We talked about version control, composable. This is going to be very important using a mount system. You can nest hyperdrives within other hyperdrives. So the way I envision using this in DZES is say Alice starts creating a hyperdrive and puts files in it and Bob wants to mount Alice's hyperdrive within his own hyperdrive. So the mount command would allow this. And if we're talking about Tumblr addressing, so say Alice's 1.1 and Bob is 2.2, well Bob could create a 2.2.1.1 and nest Alice's work within his. And he could comment on it and share things back with Alice. So that's where I see the power. And they're shareable by a 32 by K, sparse downloading, which is very important. Say you have audio and video in it. It is possible to stream through the files. And then you could have the power of a peer-to-peer network doing something like a bit torrent. If everybody is watching the same video, for example, okay, yeah, the lookups are in a distributed tri-structure, which is just magical version tagging. Okay, so yeah, this goes through all the same things. So there's examples here about the API fully documented. I'm going to look for mount. It gets mount information about an entry. So you have metadata for the mount point, the absolute path of the parent mount and the mount's metadata record. Okay, so here's the documentation about hyperdrive mounting. Okay, so you could mount other hyperdrives at paths within a parent drive. Okay, composing larger collections out of other shareable units, aggregating content from many users. You could have group mounts. Okay, so it's drive.mount, a name, a key, and options. So let's see, the options are version, a version of a drive to check out. So like Bob could comment on version two of Alice's work and then Alice could go on and create a version three, four, five. And later Bob can mount version five. So you have full provenance. And let's see, mount stream. So this is important stuff for anybody working on this to learn how to do this. So currently all the D's as ideas are in e-rank L slash articles. Okay, so you could click this to go to read this article. And you could click this to read this article. And then the example goes into the test cases directory. And it does an annotated directory listing of the files and my thinking of how they would be used to create decentralized these structures. Okay, so let's walk through this article a little bit. So we can't pull it zigzag because Ted Nelson has a trademark on that. So we're calling it D's as to learn more about Ted Nelson's zigzag ideas. This is his page. Okay, so Ted defined a zzz space, an arbitrary space of cells, connectable arbitrarily plus to minus an plurality of dimensions. I love these concise definitions. And we're building zzz structures on zzz space. And you can have a zzz engine, for example, gzz has operations upon zzz structure and views. Okay, and I recommend reading more about Ted's cosmology for his high level ideas. And then what is dzz? Okay, I want to be an open source conceptual data structure that represents graph data structures using whatever technologies are available on the decentralized web. So it's important to zzz structures a special case of a graph that imposes a restriction on how cells may be connected. So this study compares these structures to other structures. And it defines the restriction that the right edge can only connect to the left edge. Or the positive edge can only connect to the negative edge of another cell within the same dimension. So essentially, you can validate a graph to verify that it complies with that restriction. So you can build a validator to know that it is valid zzz structure within any arbitrary graph structure using whatever graph technology you want. Okay, so tools for building dzz data structures may choose to enforce it so that if there's any mutations of the graph that they always comply with that restriction. And you take advantage of features specific to zzz structures. So there are some features defined in Ted's cosmology paper which apply to zzz structures which make them very powerful. Okay, so starting with the hypercorp protocol, but I want this to be protocol agnostic. So I don't know how to get this in a state where it could be standardized. That's the project for people who can work on standardization of that. And I know there have been efforts with RDF, but if you want this to be protocol agnostic, I'd say an IPFS protocol can access decentralized zz structures, then we wanted to be protocol agnostic. Okay, so yeah, so the decentralized into my zeltymably append only logs which are hypercores, they get replicated across peers who subscribe or see them. Okay, there's built in versioning peer discovery is by the network, the hyper swarm. So you're abstracting all the network connectivity by APIs which is nice. So it enables if I know the address of a hyperdrive anywhere in the world, whoever has it can connect with me. Okay, so I don't need to know the server user or URL. And in Ted Nelson's models and literary machines, he describes tumblers as needing to know servers, users, and not URLs, but just other aspects of how to locate something. So that hash for the hyperdrive can eliminate those levels of a tumbler structure and sparse access. And you can have custom access methods. So there are efforts to look at indexing of hyperdrives which can be used, leveraged, or you could design custom access methods. So we're back to the days before relational databases, think of VSAAM or anybody out of design their own custom access methods. So it's flexibility. All right, many custom applications can be developed against the same data structures. That's important. So say you have some accessibility requirements. Maybe most people don't need them, but you can have a custom accessibility feature without having like turning on buttons, just create a new application with the accessibility features that you need. And you can, I want them to be able to run in an offline environment disconnected from the internet. So you could download the local copies of data and work with offline. So the vision, let open source communities develop decentralized applications outside of corporate boundaries and give users the choice to take their data as they migrate to different applications. That's the top of sell. And you're not going to get funding for that. So let's keep it open source. Users can contribute their own storage and bandwidth resources to the network. So this play project.io is a start at that using smart contracts to enforce proper behavior of nodes. So if you have a machine you're keeping on all the time connected to the internet, it can become infrastructure for the next generation web. So this project is called dat. Okay, so literary machines is an important resource if you're going to do any work on this. It's available. Let's see. So a docuverse where all connections between documents are available and visualized in various ways. Okay, so I want to upcycle some of the conceptual structures in that book. So the semantic web has data formats already. So either ZZ structures can be built in these formats or we can come up with something better to make it a new standard or just a graph with a ZZ structure validator. Okay, a hyperdrive can use directories to implement tumblr addressing. So a reference on tumblr addressing is these trans finite numbers which ultimately can be directories in a hyperdrive. And here then this byte of a document would be a dot nine and a 356 link. Yeah, so we can look at that in the future. Ted created the concept of inflades and it was expanded for project Zanadoo. I see them as additional indexing structures for the hyperdrives and sharing across the network. So one important thing that Ted liked is the puneful aid which is a permutation order of matrix. P O O M Thalade which was recommended to look into as useful. And I like the concept of rich links. So a link really it always has a source in a destination, the home and a type. And the types are user defined. So like if it's a comment on somebody's text or an argument or a disagreement, you define the type of link you want. And ultimately you have many different rich links, more rich links than you have actual content. And links on links can be defined as well. And the Tumblr addressing is the magic which if you extend it into the d web space, your links can use mathematics to do differences and to cite portions of text. And that can even enable trans copyright in the future. And edit decision lists are like a movie where you're editing and you're picking out the segments of the source movie that you want. So if everybody offers and readers maintain it, decision lists, they could be fulfilled via peer-to-peer connections. Trans copyright. If we have end to end encryption within webs of trust, that's my vision of how to do it. If you have other visions, there are some successful examples of it like Kendra.io. Front end applications built on the functionality demonstrated in GZZ. So your front end would build on what we know what's possible and simplify certain operations. And some things I don't like about GZZ. I want there are some keystrokes that keep fumbling me up that they could be improved. And some concepts I'm introducing, like auto cloning behind the scenes. So like if you try to do a connection, you can get a pop up that says auto clone, yes or no. And then say yes and it would do an auto clone in the background. So then you stay compliant with the restriction. And hints of available connected dimensions. So in the first video I showed you looking behind the cell and seeing available connected dimensions. That might be a good visualization or a 3D view or virtual reality view. Just to make it a little easier for users to navigate. Multiple views of either generic graph structures or these structures can be built in marketplaces or open source communities. Well that's where people to take forward. IP anonymity is external to decentralized protocols. So the nature of having a distributed hash tree, try is that it needs to know IP addresses of who is hosting in order to broker connections. So if you want IP anonymity, you'll have to use something like Tor or IP, I to P, another protocol out there. Okay, so the mount feature, which I explained earlier, it allows other hyper drives to be mounted as a sub directory. And that's what I like about it. I could extend the tumblr addressing space to for a given user and hyper drive and links. So it's an automatic like a sim link to the hyper drive using tumblers in the mounted sub directory. So if we take advantage of the mounting, then you can refer to like bobs, comments on Alice's version 2 by using bobs tumblers. So a link would be rich because it would reference a source in a destination. So like Carol can reference bobs comment on Alice as the source and her comment on that comment as the destination using the rich link of disagreement. And it would be home, Carol's home directory would be the source. So Ted draws a tumblr square in literary machines showing how links are constructed. And then he goes on to links about links. That's all in chapter four of literary machines. Okay, so we'll start with just built in versioning referencing by URL. Because in like example in beaker browser, you can suffix plus or a minus and see versions to look at older versions given a URL of a hyper drive to a document in a hyper drive. Okay, now. So I another feature I want to introduce is always trans glued. So any copy of somebody else's work is always going to be a translusion. So, so like bobs copy of Alice's version 2 would be a translusion from Alice. You could always follow it back to Alice's original. But then he can add his own comments within them as new tumblers. Okay. Keep full text of earlier version. Okay, so if you're talking about EDLs, you can either do forward delta's or reverse delta's. So the example I provide is in the Ds as directory one way of structuring hyper drives for tumblers and ZZ structures. I put a read me in each directory for comments. So the comments would be ignored by any applications. Example files will be revised over time as I get comments. Hyper drive is a way of tying all comments together in one place. You're transgluting them from the original sources using a rich link that can navigate back to the sources. Okay, so let's take a look at something here. Ds as. Okay, so if you want to read and print this out, this annotated directory can follow you through all these subdirectories. And the read me dot text is shown here as you go into each sub directory. So it's explaining what the directories are in this sub directory here. Okay, so what I'd like to look at are the issues currently in this and so like a 14 issues. So these are things that would need to sort of happen if we're going to build this thing. So here's where I keep track of things as I'm using GZZ that I want. Like a warning when an operation you're about to do will break a rank or disconnect a cell because that can frequently happen. And then you have to undo. Interference issues with certain keystroke commands are repeatedly hit wrong. Yeah, well, I could change my key mappings, but yeah, so like by hitting things like the M instead of the comma, it marks it. So maybe I'll move the M somewhere else, but that's just a quality of life issues. Okay, so now let's see linking cells across dimensions and hyper drives. Dimensions are defined in sub directories under the zero directory of a user's hyper drive. So that's a convention I established cells should be able to live anywhere and be referenced by their tumblers ranks in dimensions have Jason files that create a linked list pointing backward to the head cell. So the Jason files can include rich links to point to cells should each Jason file in a dimension be a rich link. Okay. So yeah, just thinking through where should we store things and what should be stored what kind of rules should be established it's open for discussion. I'm just going in one direction. Okay, so these are concepts I would like to see auto cloning and always transclude. So it's quality of life for users linking the cell to a cell that's already connected in the desired dimension should create a clone and link the clone to the desired cell. Yeah, because I find they have to create a lot of clones in GZ. The system should never have explicit links to external content. There should always be a transclusion link. Yeah, instead of just storing URLs in text create transclusion links. A copy of the content should be imported to the hyper drive when that's possible. If we're talking transcopy right you have to put some encryption on it and figure that out. But let's assume it's a commons that we're building so you can copy content and market as a transclusion. So let's see the source URL book recording whatever. Okay, let's see the next issue number four. EDL structure and implications for performance. So let's try not to pre-cociously optimize performance. But think about it in the back of our mind. Various forms of EDLs have appeared over the years. If we define it as a list of tumblers where each tumbler locates a span of content, then it can be a JSON file with an array of tumblers indexing within the target file or blob would be a range of bytes. So we want to take advantage of sparse querying querying provided by the hyper core hyper drive structures and some graph querying possibly. So maybe hyper cores can be used for blobs and textual documents can be stored in hyper drives. We need to think through the use cases of that. Okay, what is an EDL really? And yet it's really how do you compose documents in various ways? Like say, one is a paragraph. How do you move your paragraphs around, reorder them for different purposes? Okay, protocol agnostic. We want to be protocol agnostic, but what does that mean? Well, there is a browser out there called agregor. This is the GitHub for it, something to research, which can do IPFS and hyper core protocol. It will support multiple protocols that keeps being maintained. So if a cell contains a decentralized URL of any supported protocol, the data can be retrieved with such a browser. Agregor will be supporting web archives in the future. And that's a good format added to a hyper drive so the content can be accessed when disconnected. So I find myself doing a lot of saving of web pages that I am interested in and want to look at later. A web archiving tool that can maintain a locally-browsable copy of a website would be useful. And this would be, in my case, a translusion of a website as of a certain date. And it could be cited and referenced appropriately. So we're thinking long term, protocol agnostic, whatever future protocol the community agrees on. Okay, the API design, APIs can be written in JavaScript or maybe TypeScript or other languages. Run on client machines, that's the key. So instead of servers. An API should be designed to encapsulate access to Zez as data structures stored in hypercores or drives. So any front end application can call the API operations to access and manipulate these graphs or Zez structures in the hyper drives or whatever other protocol. So imagine an abstraction layer where you don't need to know whether you're in hypercore protocol or IPFS. You're just calling the abstraction layer to do the operations on your Zez structure or your graph. So an interface should be defined that protocol handlers can implement to access to provide such API access. This needs to be well thought out before implementing the first version because once people start using it, breaking changes cannot be made. So occasionally take a notebook and think about things. I take some cards and think about how these might look and you can look at these pictures and send me ideas. It's going to take a while to agree. Okay, use of encryption for confidential information. Certain material may be shared confidential among peers and should be saved but not disclosed. Some material may only be disclosed to members of a web of trust. The sharing is an act of trust which has the possibility of being broken by any recipient at any time which causes some type of harm when you break your contract. The information is part of a person's personal knowledge repository and should be saved somewhere for future reference. Many encryption products exist which create a key pair and encrypt messages with a public key that can be decrypted by the holder of the private key. An example is key base. So storage of encrypted files in a hyperdrive is one use case and re-encrypting files for sharing with a web of trust is another that can be either features or add on extensions. Encryption technology is will evolve so periodic re-encryption is required perhaps by a smart contract periodically reminding the owner or a team to do so or doing it automatically. The web of trust model can also be used to enforce trans copyright where upon receipt of a micropayment a document is re-encrypted with the public key of the recipient that's allowing the transgluted material to be mounted in the user's hyperdrive or equivalent technology. And the possibility of time locks can a smart contract keep documents with confidential information encrypted for a period of time before disclosure becomes public domain by decrypting it with the author's private key. Well, that's a tough problem. One work around is to store encrypted files in an external repository like key base and create a rich link that is a transglusion of the file in the external repository. So in a public hyperdrive people can see that there is an encrypted file being referenced and negotiate with the owner the terms of access that could be a website where they pay or do something we could simulate it. Owners need to assess their threat model and choose the technology to be used for disclosure. So in an example is that comes from business mergers and acquisitions information that's communicated through a data room technology which allows the people evaluating it to view it for a period of time and no other access. And they can't bring their cameras into it. Okay. Links to comments. Yes. So some comments I've received are here. A nice one came from someone who used his building a tool called trail marks who gave me comments in hypothesis. So I could click here. And see comments here. So here gave me an example and I updated it to use his link. So this is nice. Something that's a bit about one thing that's more available now. Okay. So read the comments on the article at your leisure. Operating system paths. This can be a tough issue. But depends on how you're accessing them. Long file names, path names on like on Windows. There's a 260 character path name limit. Poses all kinds of problems for an experimental system. It's okay. We're not going to use this for important data. We're just experimenting with what we could do. And then logical units of work. So like say you're keeping a two way index and you add a node. You have to update a previous nodes forward pointer to the new node. That's a logical unit of work with adding the file. So unless you're keeping a log and checkpoints and ability to roll back in a failure gets hairy. So if you could structure your code. An exception invokes some compensation actions, but how do you know those compensation actions are going to work. So that's where people run to databases. This issue may force the design to use a graph database. It can also be a relational database. But one goal is not to require the user to depend on any specific vendor products. Even like an open source, like a PGSQL. So open source databases can be used if the procedures for maintenance are automated and documented well enough for users to understand. Yes, like if I'm running a D says node and I it's easy for me to back up the database and recover by a button click. It's a lot of automations or great that you run into the same issues as a corporation and managing a database. Maybe the hyper drive protocol. So unless using the conflict, conflict free CRDT's replicated data types. You're going to run into this. So maybe the hyper drive protocol can handle long paths internally in the hyper core structures it uses. If it does then the only issue would be saving local copies of hyper drive contents on operating systems that limit path sizes. I think it can store the operating system store at all but accessing it from the operating system is an issue. So workarounds will be needed to download files to shorter path directories and maintain the illusion that the shorter path represents the real long path in the hyper drive. Fun stuff. Okay. Let's see. So we looked at that documentation of test cases. So yeah, when we're coming up with test cases for the system, you can actually use the GZZ system to document them and I created a directory for test cases. So there's one of them out there now from episode two. So anyone who has GZZ can download this zip file and put it on their desktop and the instructions are here. Okay. So exports to standard semantic web formats. So say you hate DZZ and you want to get your data out. You hate DZZ. It should be portable if you decide to use it in other systems. So an export process should be developed to serialize all the data structures to a graph structure, whatever is needed, graph ML, RTF, gone to be determined. So here's the playlist link for the DZZ videos on YouTube. So there are two so far. Go and watch them. They're fun. I'll be adding this one later. Okay. Playlist of videos by Ted Nelson. So I curated my own playlist of Ted Nelson's videos to help people get the basics. So the Zandu basic series is in here. New game in town. His demos and the history of Zandu and here's the just want to see ZIGZ egg. These are some important videos to watch to get an idea of ZIGZ egg. Okay. And then a commentary recent video what modern program is can learn from the past. Because I believe that's important. And then I'll be adding a new content to the content. I'll be adding a new content to the content. Because I want to see what can we preserve of Ted's work going forward. Okay. Yeah. My decentralized tech article for education has a comment. And namespaces. Dimensions should be logically grouped together into namespaces that are relevant for specific applications and even specific users. This can help avoid named collisions when the same dimension name makes sense in multiple contexts. The current workaround for this is to use multi dotted dimension names. So like D dot e-Rangel dot prime Siv dot mursain. which I may have some other dimensions in PrimeSive. But then you have another hierarchy. Mapping of dimension names spaces across users and applications would also be needed, which could be supported by Translusion links. So say someone else has a prime number dimension and they call it M-E-R. Well, they could translate from mine to theirs. And then you know that M-E-R means Mersane in their world. Okay, and that's a problem that will plague us everybody naming things the way they want. Okay, so feel free to add issues to this GitHub if you're thinking about this. And I don't know how much time I'm gonna have to actually do any of this work, but it's out there. Making a society in which people aren't afraid is kind of goes hand in hand with making a society that preserves provenance. But I think an aspect of that has to be a form of provenance that actually benefits people. The form of provenance that exists right now is one that discriminates against the individual whose provenance has been preserved. Right now, companies like Google and Facebook don't make money with traditional advertising which romantically tries to convince you something. Instead they micro-manage the options right in front of you. And because of the cost of choice, this becomes for the whole population, a deterministic form of behavior modification which has overtaken such things as electoral politics and who gets insurance, who gets credit offers, all kinds of things like that. And it becomes a social disaster. Meanwhile, of course, because of Edward Smodan, we know that provenance is being preserved on our behalf by government as well. So the thing is provenance must be preserved but it must be preserved in a way that the people whose provenance is deserved are benefiting from it so that it becomes part of a social contract. And I defy you to show another way to get there other than Ted's ideas. That's the solution. You did it. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.