 Hi, this is Douglas Engelbart and Brad Newberg with the Hyperscope Project, a national science foundation funded project to rebuild portions of Douglas Engelbart's groundbreaking augment system on the worldwide web. We've instrumented Douglas Engelbart's system with a screen capturing software so we can watch them use the system as well as set up a Skype environment so we can communicate as we watch what he's doing. Thanks for joining us, Douglas. Oh, this pleasure. So today, Douglas is going to use the system and so we can understand how an expert user uses augment and learn more. So Douglas, if you could just... Well, there's so many kinds of work to do and so what I just picked here is saying, oh, let's study something that was put into the journal and this means give us light and reduction to what the journal is. And it's a system within our augment environment whereby you can submit to a journal system, a given file, and a science and an integer number, serial number, and then it guarantees to keep that you can recover it with that number any time and it's unchangeable, etc. So it's the equivalent of publishing and it turns on to be a very interesting thing to publish, kind of reports, etc. And so every paper that we've published out there started out as a journal item. And so what I have in the left hand screen here is, oh, this is journal. It's the BI journal of the different journals we have, this one we call BI. And this particular article was the 2120th entry put into it and it was done that October 24th, year 2012, 48, and so this is like, I'm looking at that file now. And then this might be one way I would come in to see it with saying, show me just one line, first line of every paragraph. I'm using the narrow window with that small line and I only want to see the first two levels that are in this file. And incidentally, turn on what we call the location numbers of each of these. So I say, okay, why do I look at like this? Well, then I can see what might be interesting and go jump to it. So say, well, point is this very first paragraph under the introduction. I'll just say, I want to jump to it and I mark and I click on it and then it asks for when we show it to you, when you jump to it, what do you want? I'll say, open it up all wide with no blind clients between it and then show it to me with just the things at that level with the left margin would weigh over. And oh, before I do it, why don't I move the cursor over the other window? So this is where I'll see it. Oh, that's okay. So I click on it here and this is where I see it. Just to let people know, unfortunately, with the screen touching software, we don't see doubles as mouse pointer. So this is one thing to keep in mind as you work. Yes. All right. Good day. Anyway, so these are the first two in this content of the introduction. And so this is a very interesting thing. Just here, we're trying to introduce this hyperscope idea and we start up at the Polar Skate Challenges. Our scale challenges are best served if you want to properly scale strategic principle and either pursue. So this sort of concept of scale strategic principles is a very basic thing to all the years in which argument has been evolved. And so it takes a little while and to unfold it to people because it was looking at what we're after in the end is how do you really boost the collective capability of large groups of people to get an understanding among them and be able to understand complex urgent problems and be able to understand what the solutions could be and understand the resources that are available and then be able to commit. And as you walk through this solution approach, how you keep track of the situation and understand it enough to know when you're in trouble or know how to cure it. So understanding at many levels among large groups of people are just a piece of talent. So anyway, we're saying this and this sort of pervasive challenge in the second paragraph. So this is just to say this document was published in the year 2000 and the term hyperscope was brought into it. And we could just say, well, we'd like to learn more about it. Well, I'll jump into this item number two. And this time I'll just go to it. And so we're looking into first, I'll add two. Now we're looking at some of the whole full paragraphs underneath it. And this sort of gives us a feeling how we wanted to could read through the whole thing. So I see the first paragraph to a special note that all this thing is grandadule and open source. Well, open source development is just key to the kind of planning as large strategic thing is that we're going to be evolving in this form is the equivalent of a natural language. You know, it's just one more concept, the way they fit together, are you going to do it? And it says, well, if it's a word that somebody can come in and start patting the different verbs and nouns. It just be a very clumsy way to try to evolve in the way natural languages are. So this is where it goes. So this was the introduction to if we're going to launch the pursuit of what we call our open hyper, open hyper document project. So this hyper scope was a way to get that started legacy systems and that strategically got through. And so what is it? We say, oh, I'm going to jump and see what paragraph 2B is like. So I click on it down there and I say, before I'm going to go, what? I look up to see my view specs and I say, oh, that's right. So it will position that at the top to screen and fit it over the bed, one of the viewing specs, all like that, and to say, oh, hyper scope is going to be a likely modified web browser supported by an intermediary processor. Oh, that intermediary processor operates between the browser and the files or databases holding existing working knowledge of a collaborative community. So the hyper scope is not an editor. So anyway, a hyper scope user will be able to follow links, etc, into and between his legacy files in a manner similar to using a browser with web based HTML files. And more will be numerous new capabilities and teachers, which will give a hyper scope user considerable more flexibility in working power than use this limited to standard browsers and legacy editors. Oh, that's interesting. Well, let's just go say what kind of things do we expect to see in there? Well, now we might want to start looking at the outline on the left-hand window. So I want to jump to it and oh, an unfolds loop. So I'm saying, oh, these are the first lines of each of the paragraphs like it's sort of going to get an idea of what it's like. And so I see, oh, that's great. And but I know I have to dig down in between. In that case, what's this user's interface that we're talking about here? So I'll just jump to it in the right-hand window and see it. So I don't expect people to follow this and read all this carefully or something, but this is an example. And we say, okay. Now, what if I see this and I'd like to change it like this? I say, well, let's see if I'd like to replace this word with capability. This is normally the way I would do it. I'd type, keep the ability to talk and I say, I'm going to replace this word with what I just typed in. We'll do it. And it says, oops, you can't modify it. And turn. Oh, that media is right. And you're looking at it this way. You can't. I said, well, what could I do? Oh, let me jump to a, I know there's a file I call v, just from the heck of it. And temporary usage. And oh, hey, look, let's just say we could copy this. Why don't we copy this whole branch? It's here. What does branch mean? That means item two, branch three, I mean, has all these others, V, A, B, C, D, F, T, right? On to that, that's the whole branch in my structure. I said, copy that branch and I could copy over here. See? And bring it to there and drop down a level. And, oh, you know, now it's got new numbers because it's the one on myself. Oh, hey, now I can edit it. In fact, that's like I said, oh, let's just look at all that myself and say, now if I'd like to edit it, I can. On the first place, this, I know that I've been bothered by paragraph three, the third one here, one C and one A, they need to take care. I didn't want to like that. I wanted to transpose them. So I say transpose these two statements, which really is our way of saying interchange, I see. And you say, okay, do it. And then, think of it interchange them. Well, that's just one of the verbs that we've evolved after the years. We can say transpose word two, one, we can say transpose word transpose the archiving with the evolving here. See? Okay, do it. So they just are interchange. We can transpose phrases. This whole thing that goes up to this phrase, we want to transpose that with this one here. And it'll do it. And then we say, oh, we need, hey, this way knocked out out and this uppercase, this word and flexibility. And for us this way, we can say we just have to replace that character with lowercase fee if we want. There's all sorts of ways to do it. And so what happened, oh, we better move that period down here. We say move character click click and move character. So this is showing just a little bit about the kind of control or command language that it's all a whole bunch of verbs and nouns. So we say, oh, what are the verbs that are there? Well, I can hit a cross the mark and it'll, oh, can you see that? No, I'm sorry, the way that we've got the windows set. Oh, I can see it. It's coming down. You see something different from what I do. So tell me what you see. Is it showing all the commands? Well, Katie, well, that's very interesting because I have to slide way up here to see them. Yes, we are. It's overlaying them on top of the bottom two windows. Oh, oh, oh, that's the problem with this. Okay, so suppose we skipped out. But in any given time, I can see all the different verbs now. So since I've got, I say I can delete. Yes, I can delete. What kind of things might I delete? I just say, well, I could delete a character or I could delete a word. Well, I can delete a phrase. Doug, what's the difference between a phrase and text? Does that mean that phrase is any sequence of visible characteristic? So I just need to hit, you see provision over here? A little pull the whole word out of it. Yeah, divisible strings, which words and things with periods. So phrase would be the full string of disables. Nice. And yes, you could say text, which you have to be a lot more exact about being able to designate these characters. How do you, I've had trouble putting something at the beginning of a line before something else. How do you do that? Like, if you wanted to put a word before integrated. Oh, insert front. Okay. Cool. I didn't know about that. And that will go in if I don't get a space, it will be right in front of the word, like that. So you should, what I want to say is I want to insert in front of it. I have to hit Y, Y in a space. Okay. To be like that. I can cancel out. Oh, I can say I'm going to leave from there. Where? In the, um, um, um, yeah. It's time to say delete text. There are more subtle ways I can do some of those things, but it takes the next nation. Um, are there any questions here from the audience? Um, can you, can you show submitting a document to the journal? That's a process. Yeah. Is there, are there any open journals? Oh, never. We have two main ones that we can use and there are five or six others. Maybe more of the, the different customer groups that we're using in over the years. It happens on more journals, established for them. And so we have the very first one on the call job and journal. And for all the others, you have to type in the name of the journal. But if you put type in any name, just a number, they will go to the omelet journal. I didn't know that that's a default journal. Yeah, it was just the very first one. Uh, yeah, I can't think of any numbers. They're great long numbers. Yeah, it's up to, you know, 1015,000, 1020,000 more. Yeah. See, I could have wanted to get some indirect, indirect things. And then, uh, have some of them have a start hand way to going to general, or going to any place. And do you mean using that the macro that you showed me last time? Or you mean actually, um, Oh, so you've got this found him X. Oh, you're index file. So what is that X is a special file you've created, right? Yeah. It has sort of a list of what you call that is that similar to kind of your bookmarks. Is that kind of your kind of a listing of all your stuff? Or what is X? What do you, what do you keep in here? So, um, Um, Oh, Um, So what, what delicious is there was a macro called jump to indirect. Is that right? That allows you to quickly jump to a named item that then leads to another file. Kind of like a link database to certain extent. Is that right? So what it is when I say, uh, JL, then if I hit the LF, it was a new one. So this is another macro called JP. What is, what does this one do? No, sorry. I just remember, oh, this family. So I type LF. And then what I ask you what that macro does is make. On the jump to the link that's here in this file on a statement named KLF. So it jumps to this particular link that you're seeing right here. It jumps to this point that not the period says, okay, jump here and then with a view stack of, hey, whatever level this is, is that one level, is only look at the notes below this one. Tses is one line each. Why says right find the Trunon? And Oses, they turn on my intuition. Right here. Can you? Sorry. The, the capital, uh, that you, using include links. Do you have an include link in there? I'd love to see one. I've been to show you. See, can I say change the views back from older P? Nice. And, um, um, it'll be done this way too. Why is this slow? And actually what's written underneath this PLF branch are these statements just say include. Do you mind turning on statement numbering? I just want to see if they learn the kind of statements. Also, there's our. So it's way down deep and as opposed to you tend to. And, uh, just I think sometimes confusing for people to see those numbers. You know, numbers there. Wow. That's so sophisticated though, because you're actually saying include what's at this link, but you're actually doing indirect linking in there. You're saying go over. Jump link up here. That's what the J.I. At the left would jump to this jump here to this statement and say jump on that link. And that link says, OK, go to this take a position where we are. And. BGT one would be this predictor saying what to see not all. It's adding all what protects all through it says, Oh, actually invoke each of these. Oh, no, no, I mean the, um, the includes are very sophisticated because you're, you're saying include this link, but that link actually goes over to G. Oh, goes over to HPH finds the first link and then follows it. So that's going to go to my HPH file. And what it goes to is the phone missing for when it's not a garden. So it's going to be a lot of things. So I'm going to go to my HPH file and then take. To tell you what. Can you jump to that link? What do you? What's there? So that's going to go to my HPH file. And what it goes to is the phone missing for when it's not a garden. So is G.E the label? Can you turn on showing label names? No, G.E is not that. It is. It is. Down here. In order to just be more efficient and slightly typing. We'll bar which they're four or five and this. This is. As I say. Um. Um. I'll find something named. E. Well, I put that down here as a initials. It's both like go to G.E. And they've linked it's there. Now they got you. They'll jump up to the next moment of the system. Nice. So it's just that indirect shortcut from me that I go into this file that has my home phone. And I think that. And I want to go see what the garden is. I guess the number is something. I know I could just say type her initial to E.L. And it will find C in pixel. There for this. For. That. You. That is the material. It is. But I'd love to see. The label. So the label of that statement. Because it looks like the label is C.E. Is that right? Yeah. I don't don't know where the label is. I'll say sharp. Show the name. Members. That one that says. Okay. that one that says, okay, it was preceded by a null and terminated with a comma, then that word in there is going to be taken as the label of the snow gear. So if I jump to GE, then come on. I didn't want to. Harvey, it's not. What's that? Oh, is it frozen? No, I just forgot. It's so nice. Okay, so here's the statement, then we'll just turn on the movements again and see, okay, oh, each of those is a, that's good. It's good to just get that. I didn't realize that each of those is a statement. Oh, look at that. That's awesome. So you put the label on it as its own statement and then the first link jumps up one to the actual address book entry. So that's awesome. I'm playing. Wow. So why did you choose to do it there instead of doing it on 7-8-2-C? Because there's several angle bars. Oh, yeah, I'm going to do a bar. So I could have done it by it. If the list was created, the fixed all the time way could jump to it by the end of the end of the node. And I missed the family or something to. But this is so easy. I want to make some of the D on dot L. I'm pretty sure my analyst name is called Dott. And so I must be a guest for me. Yeah, sure. I'm up to the E's. I'm coming. Well, and those are just for cuts that I have to use with my family. Oh, look at that. That's great. I'm going to try some Christina. You have two labels. So you can use that. Nice. And then I see over in the Christina Engelbart, I see the C e comma. I'm sorry, the B i dash C e. Yeah. What is that? What are you doing there? Well, and she sent the C video. I'm going to look at my mail file. So what you just did is you jumped to your file name, which is a special file you've made. And then you follow the first link in there. This is what you felt as last time. Yeah. Which is how to buy this. Okay. Nice. And like this list of links here are the consecutive files of every month, older and somebody that wanted to help to buy them, go to file them and take the first link. That will take me to T. A. Four. I say to help. Now that will go to this. Nice. This is for March. This is the February D.A. Do it before January. So I was, you know, it's the second month ago on the 12th. So what was I going to do for you? Oh, well, I just wanted to do a time check with the quick. Just let you know we've got about five more minutes. I want to keep the screen sharing sessions in 30 minutes. So easy for people to watch them. How about in the next five minutes, if you show maybe a constant analyzer on your address book? All right. Or probably be better in my mail maybe. Okay. Yeah. Work. That's great. However you would use a constant analyzer. That's even better. Yeah. That's the best place to use it. So I'm not friends with what I do in my contact smiles. I've been like that. I've been seeing the virtual like that. So. There's. I'm going. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. This is a. I don't say here. Only the first. All the first level. And here. And you see all once. And I. When we were the group. They get. I'll take away that. And. I don't know. I don't know. I'll take away that. Character gaps. Like this. So let's. We look. There. And. And a. M. That's why I've already. Only set. Out to people easily. People. I don't know. Whenever I'm. Not. And. Oh. Is that a file? I can set. You know. and that will say, oh, I want to sort of tap-puck down to the thingy. They get there so that's down to the end date. Why, how do I know what's the date? Well, this sort of pattern saying freaks the nail branches. So what's underneath that, that's the actual nail concrete itself. Doug, let's just really quick, we're getting a little bit of, I think the network is causing a little bit of audio corruption. So just talk a little slower, I think that might make it easier. Sure. Right, thank you. Thanks. So anyway, you can see the contents for the nail item is, the pecs is we call it to a bunch of items there. The next layer will down from nail header.