Kind: captions
Language: en
Hi.
&gt;&gt; My goodness, you guys are ahead of time.
Hello.
&gt;&gt; Good morning.
&gt;&gt; Good morning. You're having brunch,
Peter.
&gt;&gt; Yep.
&gt;&gt; Yep. Cool.
&gt;&gt; I know. No one wants to watch me eating,
so I have the cam off today.
&gt;&gt; This is very true.
So, just checking things here to get
ready for you guys.
Uh, okay. Hang on.
I am very very very excited about today.
&gt;&gt; It's uh
just crazy.
Okay. Uh hang on here.
So we'll see who is joining today. I
sent the call out a little um wider than
normal
and uh Mark is here for which I am very
grateful. Hey Mr. Mark.
&gt;&gt; Hi.
&gt;&gt; Uh because I I sent the call out a bit
wider. I'm going to wait just a a brief
minute. Uh I'm away from my normal
place. I'm in Norway with the family for
almost two weeks, which is nice except
internet problems today. So, I'm not at
home.
&gt;&gt; Hi, Peter. And hello to Moit Eric who I
don't think I've met before. I've been
I've been busy.
&gt;&gt; My first time.
Good to see you.
&gt;&gt; That's a great opportunity for a brief
introduction. First by Moheit and then
by Eric if you don't mind guys.
&gt;&gt; Uh okay. Uh so I am an independent
researcher
uh working at the intersection of uh
medium design augmented intelligence
uh and complex systems. Uh so currently
I'm working on a project for building
our med uh our uh medium of interaction
into a medium of cognition. So uh what
using the insights of distributed
cognition and from disciplines like
architecture, neuroscience based on uh
the entanglement principles of quantum
physics and complex complexity science.
&gt;&gt; So hi Mark I'm Eric. I live in Delaware
and um I'm retired. You're very quiet,
Eric, for some reason.
&gt;&gt; That would be
&gt;&gt; I was even more quiet because I was
muted, but
&gt;&gt; that would be this microphone here. Can
you hear me now?
&gt;&gt; Yeah, that's better. Yeah,
&gt;&gt; thank you. Yeah. Hi, Mark. Um I'm Eric.
I'm a retired software engineer. Um I'm
in Delaware. I'm connected with the
University of Delaware and their
lifelong learning program now. Um but uh
my interests are how can we take the
ideas of Ted Nelson and Doug Engelbart
and expand them going forward and uh the
possibility of spatial computing is a
promising direction for it.
&gt;&gt; Thank you, Eric.
&gt;&gt; Um actually Peter and Mark, do you mind
introducing yourself to Eric? I'm not
sure if he knows even who you are,
Peter. Sorry, we should have done this
before.
&gt;&gt; Peter, do you want to go first?
&gt;&gt; Thank you, chewing.
&gt;&gt; I was chewing.
Uh, well, I am a lawyer programmer
hybrid independence scholar. Um, I've
been with the group for ages since Mark
first introduced me to Freud long time
ago. And Frod and I share the bond of
having both attended the most wonderful
university in New York State, Syracuse.
That's a brief summary. Okay. Uh Mark.
&gt;&gt; Uh okay. Uh well I yes I'm a sort of
semi-independent researcher. I have a
fig leaf for being a visiting fellow at
my old university but uh essentially now
I'm a um unwaged independent researcher
sort of I suppose I'm supposed to
retired now um in UK. So I I I recently
along rather alongside Fred I studied a
doctorate in web science at Southampton
University which is sort of central
hybrid media stuff. Hello Tom. And um my
area of interest really is is um
sustaining knowledge long term. So I've
40 years plus of basically turning up to
broken systems. I've been an information
emergency plumber after I was a naval
signals officer. So I I I have a a
somewhat different experience of
information. Everyone else has talked
about what they want to happen. I'm
talking about what actually is happening
and can we make anything work out of it.
Um, which I've come to realize is uh a
somewhat unusual um sort of niche to be
in. Um, and at the moment, sorry, I
haven't been around recently because
I've been doing something for a client
in Oz and I have been I'm shephering ACM
conference uh at the moment and nothing
is documented and everything's changed
and no one's unhappy. But apart from
that, all is wonderful. Lovely to see
you all.
&gt;&gt; Speaking of broken systems, right?
[laughter]
&gt;&gt; Hi Tom.
&gt;&gt; Good morning everyone.
&gt;&gt; Uh hi. Okay. Um yeah, Tom, why don't you
also do a brief uh intro to Eric?
&gt;&gt; Okay. Well, I thought we did we didn't
do this before, but okay, no problem. Uh
talking about myself is one of my great
sins in life. Um
I am a like like Mark always uh into uh
trying to figure out how to break uh to
unbreak systems. uh in my case uh one of
my primary focuses for decades has been
the education system but I also uh
understand the parallels between what's
going on in education and the society at
large because my my background is in
political science in terms of degrees
and uh but I've been a technologist
since the Apple 2 days so you know I've
got that all going in parallel uh uh and
um yeah it's all kind of coming together
um because I've always approached things
from the perspective of the user
to quote Tron. Uh [laughter]
and um that's made me a little bit of an
oddball when it comes to the technology
side of things and my understanding of
the technology side of things makes me a
bit of an oddball when it comes to the
academic side of things. So I'm always
nowhere at the same time.
&gt;&gt; Thank you, Tom. Um Peter Demetrius, good
to see you. Um, do you want to do a
really super brief intro to Eric? I
don't think we did it last time for
everybody.
&gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. Okay. Yeah. Quick, quickly,
quick. Uh, I'm uh retired from IBM after
42 years last year and have a lot of
experience in application development
mostly. Um,
my um world uh was involved in bringing
small talk to uh uh the programming
world back in the in the 90s and two.
That was my big shift. uh done a lot of
work recently with the federated wiki
working with Ward Cunningham over the
past eight 10 years on his next version
of wiki which is kind of fun to play
with and uh um I've been involved in
some 3D work which is where I got sucked
in um over the come past years with uh
uh when the the research and the stuff
that uh Frodo is doing in with with the
headset is amazing and and fun. and I
think it's wide open and has a lot of
interesting things and I've got some
friends who do a lot more of that than
me that I kibbitz on. So, I'm kind of
bridging communities a lot of times and
poking ideas back and forth.
That's me in a nutshell and a real real
tech nerd geek. Uh I don't have a PhD in
anything
other than life.
&gt;&gt; Perfect intro.
Perfect intro. Uh okay, I'm gonna move
you guys small. Now, if anybody happens
else happens to join, uh, please just
say, "Welcome so and so, so I know that
they're here cuz I can't see them.
Um, you can see my slides, right?"
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Okay. This is so absolutely exciting,
right? So, I had a brief text chat with
Mark earlier today and he pointed out
some things and there was some back and
forth and I was like, "No, the whole
main point was missing." So, it's now in
here. So, this is good. Uh, you've heard
about origami text before in the guise
of an EPUB standard. This is trying to
do something even simpler. And I blame
one single person, Eric.
Eric sent this message and of course in
this community,
this is what this is what we think about
constantly.
So because of you, Eric, and because of
um having done one joke project, one
revival project, and a
kind of utility project with Claude in
Xcode, I decided to see what could be
done for this kind of thing.
And my discovery, and if you disagree
with me, that's totally cool. And also
for once, um try not to interrupt
because I'm on a flow. Please write
notes for for comments and questions
afterwards. But uh in my experience
um Dave Millard u professor and friend
of Mark and mine at Southampton when he
used the headset app the last time he
said he wishes the AI could control it
in the same way as the user which is
clever and obvious once I heard it. Now
it turns out that vibe coding I had a
misconception. You probably didn't, but
my misconception was Claude or whatever
will do the code. You'll get all kinds
of stuff and there might be spaghetti.
It might work. We don't know. But what
is really mindbending to me is that
claude code acts as a client to Xcode.
So that means that it has to be
validated by Xcode. It uses the
libraries that are provided. So that's
why I put the sentence, the threshold of
creating an app has been lowered to
almost nothing.
And I'm talking about serious app. I'll
give you a brief demo. And the whole
point of today is well, it's a little
bit to try to sell you on the big idea
of origami text. But the bigger idea is
to sell you on
even early Photoshop changed image
editing forever. I believe we're now at
a point where anybody with our
resources, like a private individual
with a little bit of money, not
thousands or hundreds of thousands of
millions, just a few hundred, can really
make a solid usable app. That is
absolutely crazy. Uh because also
earlier today, Mark uh wrote FOSs and I
I don't know if I've heard it before,
but it means free soft uh free
open-source software. And very often
somebody will make a new standard and an
app, but everybody has to use their app
to use the standard. Nothing happens.
Now it's become so ridiculous that we're
going to do something live in a bit
where you guys will suggest something
and I'll see if Claude can do it while
we talk. But I mean, and it is it is a
mindbending shift beyond anything I've
ever come across. So briefly ostensibly
today is about origami text the app and
the format but it really is about this
thing they called vibe coding let's just
call it um LLM and Xcode right so this
particular way of doing it because of
Eric's beautiful invitation
and because we're all here I believe
hands of hyperard and very very simple
elegant ways of doing things and because
none of us here support massive
corporations in this other things sure
but it is really nice if we have an
object that is a communication so the
whole point here is we have a JSON
object
that is the formality and then inside it
it's plain text
and we also have a way of um naming
these [clears throat] files and please
let me say and I'll probably say it
again all of this is up for grabs
Right now there's username, title, and a
date. Not what's here has been updated.
If you guys think it should be do
something else, we can do that. Right?
That's what's so absolutely mad about
this. This is the first time I can
imagine presenting to you guys a piece
of relatively robust software. But if we
agreed to change something, it's
possible.
So the whole thing we're trying to do is
communicate by small connected units.
Right? I'll go through that after. The
point is that
the mechanism how these units move is
irrelevant for this piece of software.
So for instance um well it it has the
notion of a community folder that could
be on a server, it could be on iCloud,
it could be on ex sorry um a file system
or it could be local. Really doesn't
matter. The files that go between people
can be emailed, FTPD, texted whatever
doesn't matter. This system doesn't care
about that at all. Um so the things that
have been built is um yeah this is what
Claude said at the end. I don't think
it's actually that useful. So, before I
actually show you what it is, um, any
questions or comments?
Okay.
So, you can see here from the
discussions I've had of building this
with Claude, I'm going to make you guys
a biter, bit bigger. Uh, it it I asked
it um because it knows I'm having a
meeting with you guys. That that's the
other thing. I know you guys are all
serious techies, but this was a huge
shock to me. The clawed AI in Xcode
is a full claude. So I can tell it
things like Ted Nelson did this and
this. What do you think about how that
would relate to this other thing? And
then it will bloody well react to it.
It's absolute insanity.
So based on what we've been doing, it's
written down cuz I wanted to cheat, have
some slides for you guys, right? And I
told it this is the format. These are
the principles. Eric sent some
principles via email. Uh all of these we
need to discuss and incorporate. It
doesn't really matter what it actually
says. Uh it's just a crazy thing that
it's here. So I'm going to see any
um looking at your comments.
Uh [snorts] sobering experience of
claude code. Yes.
Yeah. Yeah. So the way that I look at uh
any AI, the human is the manager.
You know, even a human worker can do
stupid So I I'm not saying this is
a nirvana and everything has reached and
the end of the world. No, but I am
saying that for all intents and purposes
uh the cost if we take into account,
sorry I tabbed wrong here. If we take
into account um
fixes, revisions, further testing and
all of that, it's basically been
reached. So here it is.
This is origami text. It even takes care
of the little uh about box. And as
you'll see, it's properly open source.
It's the MIT license. It was Claude who
told me I needed a specific license. I
can't just say it's open. Uh there's a
credit to us. There's the URL.
The settings are very robust. It does
the settings easily.
Now, because this is based on a
discourse,
one thing it needs to know is who the
user is.
So, if you're an academic, you will have
an Orchid ID. Or ID, Mark, how do you
say it?
&gt;&gt; I believe it's normally called Orchid.
&gt;&gt; Um, but I suspect like all these other
things like Latte or Latte, all this
sort of thing, you can [laughter] you
can row your own and occasionally people
in the room may look surprised. I don't
think that I don't think there isn't a
you know necessarily a Greek
pronunciation on it.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, [snorts] fair enough. Um, also I
can toggle to use a test account so I
can communicate with myself. Right, that
was one prompt to get that working as a
toggle here and it's phenomenally useful
for testing because you guys can't test
it because I built this with my machine
being Mac OS 27 and therefore Xcode 27.
So builds cannot go live which I just
disco discovered an hour ago. Right. It
it also allows you to mute people. So if
there are people in the community who's
just beginning to be a bit spammy, just
mute them, right? Uh there are options
here for normal writing. This is
extremely basic. Uh if you also use a
PDF library, it can open so that you can
set that. Um there's AI for views and
this is really key. It is really really
simple to make a view for this. You
don't have to redo the app. it it's
built a more modular system where you
can define a view of the data and it can
be plugged in and um there's a starter
and it gives information. If we think
this is an exciting approach we should
definitely make this clear for people um
and and deal with it and then finally
this information about the format.
So as it goes on
it it has written this markdown document
right now author excuse me author that
was a yeah it can actually import author
documents and it can import um markdown
documents and word documents now so if I
go into the original origami text for
instance this is what it looks like
uh these are rubbish because I've been
testing but it looks normal and nice
So, we have a few things. Uh, one thing
I want to add is what this is when it's
published. I want to be able to have a a
field where say if it's an RFC
or if it's a statement, the kind of
stuff we've all talked about, right? If
you have been communicating with people,
you can also do this. I could for
instance say for attention of Mojit. So,
all of you can get it. It's an open free
piece of paper. But Mahit will have it
bold because it's to to him. So I will I
don't need that. That's a double title.
Don't need that. Okay.
So now export command shift E or I can
do export. And this is where it's
beginning to be interesting.
This is where I say that's an RFC.
I forgot it literally was done 15
minutes before the meeting. It's not
pretty, but it is there. Right. This is
the formatting of the ID. Uh the
document is the title is origami text,
initial, beginning, last name, and then
the exact time to make it unique. If
this was written by AI, I can actually
choose to have that as a metadata tag
saying it was produced on behalf of me.
So, I'm just going to do this.
And uh I think I did it to the right
place.
So
I have to choose folder for this.
Yeah, you can I'm just using my desktop
now.
But here are the the folders. So now you
can see
responding. Okay, so this is the first
origami documents and this is key. It of
course works on visual meta. There's a
button to hide it,
right? Also, it's super easy thing to
make.
and uh published.
I have published this document. I can
supersede it, follow up, use it as a
template or retract it. So if I now do
supersede, it allows me to make a new
version, version two,
and it will publish that as a new
document.
So let let's just do this
new thing. And then I just save, export.
No special thing. Boom.
Timeline. Here it is. origami text
version two. Um we have all documents.
We have um this is also really
important. These are the documents I
published. These are my drafts.
Once something is published, it is no
longer a draft. You know, so the basic
versioning and all of this is just fun.
But the last few things to show you is
we have these um basic connection views.
Uh we have author views. There's only
two authors. It'll list whatever they
have made. Uh hot paragraphs if they've
been cited. We don't have that yet. We
can do AI insights.
Yeah, it hasn't gone in there yet. It'll
find themes,
open questions, disagreements, health.
So these are computational or AI and
they can be produced as different views.
So do you agree that in terms of this is
just maybe 10020 pounds worth of tokens
done in half a week it's a bit amazing
the question of whether it's useful is
an entirely different question
I sorry I wasn't implying it wasn't
useful I was just generally trying to
understand
I'm sitting here at the moment I got
Discord open I got Slack I mean because
various people insist that I can't work
with them unless they use that system.
So I'm wondering so my question is is is
narrow. It's just saying okay so what's
this using which the plethora of
existing information systems uh don't do
the the key here is
let me start less practical and more
philosophical.
It can be the approach. I'm not talking
about the implementation of the specific
structure of the document. I feel it's
more of a hypertextual approach even
though both Doug and Ted use databases.
Um I I think it is important that we own
our own data first of all. Um masses of
it should never lose it. It should never
be an algorithm for the kind of
community. So this is for oursiz
community or bigger. This is not
designed to replace Twitter cuz people
could start spamming it and do all kinds
of stuff. Uh the benefits are we as a
community, the immediate people in the
room and a few more people couldn't be
here. Uh any one of you can get the code
from this on your Mac and just type in I
don't like what Fro did there. It's
absolutely stupid. Let me do this other
thing.
So the entire system
and I'm going to talk to you like your
babies because I'm a baby too. This is
really hard to understand.
We can change the program as easily as
before we could do a pencil sketch.
It's loopy,
right? I mean
&gt;&gt; and forgive me
that that ability is not new. I know
it's exciting when you do it yourself
for the first time. And I I've had, you
know, my little epiphany ticking around
with the AI, but I'm trying to drill
behind that in the sense that um so one
of the things that I take from that is
it's uh federated. You're you're going
down the federated route. Uh which is
not a well understood uh subject by the
majority of people. Uh it's not when I
say it's not understood doesn't mean
it's bad. It's just they don't know
about it. And what I'm finding in trying
to in you know help someone implement
one is that uh the biggest problem is
that people actually who don't work in
federated tech systems the whole time
really don't have a clue what it means
because there's a big disconnect between
the sort of notion of ownership of
something and then as opposed to well
where does it live on my machine or or
because people broadly understand you
know uh sort of the sort of relationship
with servers and things and that what
took most of them what 20 years or
So it's unsurprising that people are
struggling with this notion. Um and
often it's sort of we we intermix
probably confusingly that there's the
sort of social aspiration layer
description layer of it. uh and then the
the implementation there because of
course at the end of the day what you
can't escape is you you may you get the
overview and you then go to use this
thing and there's a thing where you type
stuff in a box and stuff happens but it
doesn't really explain what's going on
which is where people get lost.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Um I'm honestly not worried about
that yet because this is not designed
for the general user. It is designed
exactly for people like us. Now your
points are still valid even within that.
There is no onboarding. There's no
welcome. There's no explaining. If we go
further with this, that has to be there.
There's no question. It it literally has
to say something like it's like giving
someone a letter, physical paper letter.
Um you know that that's a big part of
it. But the the real excitement for me
is
you know scaling to markets, people's
perceptions, all of that. That's all
real. But I just feel that if we as a
community can build something like this
in [clears throat] in a world, you know,
to speak to use the language again, you
know, to help with people, not in a bad
way, but as in let them not
water down what this can be because
maybe we get to a threshold where
someone can look over our shoulder and
say, "You did what?"
Right? This is not there yet at all. But
you know this this is just a
demonstration that um
proper code that can be in the app
store. I have two other apps in the app
store um done in the same method. They
work that's the word thing. They they
work.
&gt;&gt; So what are we what kind of things are
are we doing in this that we can't do in
a messaging app in a in the in a general
messaging system?
Well, that's partly the threading and um
so you know here you have copy to site.
So you can site a specific section of a
specific message. You can't do that with
an email.
&gt;&gt; Uh and also we have you can I'm answer
no I'm answering you. I think it's a
very good I think it's a very good
question.
&gt;&gt; Um you can also do things like um you
know say this you read this you want to
extend it support a question and
disagree. We have link types, but we
have link types that aren't types.
They're just you can't just click to
reply. You have to choose one currently.
So boom, disagreeing with you know
that's standard text and said this is
not very cool
and uh I won't tell you why.
&gt;&gt; So have you that's interesting because
did you have you read much about sort of
you know because we've been here before
with Trigg's work. It was in the first
in fact the first hypertext PhD was all
about link types and he spent a long
time and worked out I think there were
something like 157 different link types
and that was all you'd ever need and
basically that was the end of link types
&gt;&gt; because systems were then created where
you had to decide something to which you
didn't know the answer before you could
go to the next step and that that is
difficult in a messaging sense because
you may not know it's fine to know yeah
I definitely disagree with that but in
most cases you may just have a comment
forcing someone to go through a complex
triage of
&gt;&gt; it's not a complex triage Mark
&gt;&gt; it it
&gt;&gt; it doesn't matter even if there are only
two things you've still got to decide
you know it's the old two button meme
you've still got to make a decision and
that's that's the fundamental uh sort of
grist in the mill the friction that
actually slows down the communication
&gt;&gt; mark
yes I have the same PhD as you I have
read the same sources I I am familiar
with the problem with link types
absolely Absolutely. The difference
between then and now, we can do it. And
if you, let's say you, you take this
repo from me and you build a different
version that only has a respond, not the
other ones. Totally cool. That is an
open market of interaction ideas,
right? I'm not saying that any of these,
you know, all of these features or
whatever are
&gt;&gt; my memory of 30 years worth of working
with this, most of it is probably
incorrect.
Yeah. Okay. Now, just [laughter] to be
clear, my comment earlier wasn't about
credentialism or so. I literally was
just because, you know, Tri Trigg's work
really was the the sort of, you know,
bottom of this. And what's interesting
is um we haven't gone back to that
probably for a good reason. So, I was
just interested as to what the the the
genuine sort of thought was behind doing
this because you presumably did it for
after conversation which I've not heard.
&gt;&gt; Uh no, there was no conversation. It was
just that email. This is just literally
So here's the desktop, right? And it's
just these two documents that have been
sent out. So you But the fact that you
can have if you choose to disagree,
it then has a link to that document. Oh,
did I delete it by accident? Right. Um,
let me just put that back. Right. So if
we go back here and you click
disagreeing with first or origami
document, it loads it.
Right. The fact that we can play with
these things I just think is absolutely
fantastic.
&gt;&gt; Right. Hide metadata. We talked about
that for visual meta forever. No,
actually let's, you know, show it. Hide
it. Whatever. It can be a button. We can
even do things like uh let's go. Yeah.
Okay. So, that's a big one. So, I I
select
this text
and um
Oh, actually, I don't know where it is
now. But what I'm going to do is um copy
to sites. Then I'll make a new document.
New for
site thing. And that's me. So I'll just
put that down here. Right. Save. Export.
Put on the desktop.
So here's a link.
No surprise.
But also look at this tiny little icon
here. Click on that.
It shows it in line.
Is it stretch text? Is it a is it a
transclusion? Is it whatever?
&gt;&gt; I don't know. But the point is we can
play with these things. This is just a
prompt to add or change.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. But to understand so but I the
thing is so I get that long thing. It's
not quite clear if that's a file name or
a link or something and I have to have a
special app enable to to unwrap that
extra bit if I'm understanding. Again,
none of this is negative. I'm genuinely
trying to understand what what this is
actually solving. I I totally get the
fun of making it. I totally get
Okay, Mark Mark. Okay, but you there's
this.
It's not what it's solving. I've already
gone through that. It is not owned by a
database. It's not going to rot because
something goes down. Each individual
piece of communication is a file. These
are fundamental local first issues.
Whether it's considered a problem or not
really depends on the on the user. The
point is more that we have a sandbox
experience now as a community that if we
agree with the format for these little
JSONs,
we don't have to agree on a single
interaction. We don't have to agree on a
single problems being solved. So it's
more of the opportunity, right? So this
is the document. It's JSON, super
simple, right? It has happy little ids.
It's got happy little information,
metadata. It's it's all there, right?
That that's the basic.
&gt;&gt; We've never had we've never had a chance
where
somebody builds an app. I mean, author
has cost me over the years a very very
large amount of money. This has cost me
maybe under200 in tokens.
So, if if next Monday, let's say one or
two or three or all of you come back
with what we saw first Monday was
inspirational but rubbish, I'll fight
you on it and it'll be the best possible
fight I could imagine. You know, it's
not a fight of what if. It is a fight of
I did and now I can undo and redo. It's
I used the term before but it absolutely
blows my mind
and because the documents the the only
thing that I demand demand in quotes is
that the documents say what the heck
they are the visual meta principle they
say it on the same layer as contents
then almost nothing else matters because
people can choose what they use and I'm
sure Peter Wasila will use it in a very
different way over to you Peter.
Okay, I had a very interesting
experience this morning. I was looking
at the open type font inspector and I
just dropped the link in the side and um
it had the substitution tables that you
can pull out of an open type font. Um
those describe how if you have a
sequence of glyphs that appear in order,
you should replace them with an
alternate glyph. and it handles
things like contextual substitution, uh,
dealing with custom kerning in some
situations. But when I open that
inspector, if you take a look at it, it
gives you a huge glob of JSON that is
utterly unintelligible. Uh, so I opened
it up and looked at the GUB table for
the default font and it has a block of
JSON at the bottom called lookups and it
was utterly opaque to me. So I copied
that block of JSON and I dropped it into
Grock and asked Grock if it could figure
out what the format was in that and how
do you make sense of it and it was just
absolutely amazing. Um, it just popped
up a beautiful description of the
format. It walked me through what the
different aspects of it were so that I
could go and reach in with code I might
write myself and actually extract
something useful from it. And absent
that, I would have probably had to kill
half a day reading through documentation
describing the open type data file
format. and it still would have been
very frustrating developing the mental
mapping between the block of JSON that
it was dumping and what the
documentation was talking about. So
that's a capability that simply didn't
exist before you had modern systems
and it's just incredibly helpful.
And just for background, the reason I
did that is I've been doing a deep dive
into
topography issues because I really want
to get latte style formatting and n plus
line breaks on my web pages.
And when you go down that road, there's
a beautiful library called Tech Line
Break 2 that can handle getting the
justification right for you. However, it
depends on knowing what the width of the
glyph characters are. And then the width
of the glyph characters takes you down
the rabbit hole of dealing with the
kerning and font substitution issues,
which is why I found that font inspector
to try to get the data out. Because if I
could pull the data out from a font
ahead of time, then I could just
prepackage the data file and not have to
have the web app wasting time trying to
render the characters so that it can
measure them on screen to figure out
what values to throw into the line break
algorithm.
&gt;&gt; Right. Thank you, Peter.
Um, oh, Eric, I'm just going to throw
out a question, but you go before
anybody else's the question. The
question is a reversal of Mark's
question. What is the benefit of using
current apps over trying something new
that might be better other than the
obvious learning curve? Um, I'd like to
hear comments on that. Eric, please go
ahead.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, well, I think apps need some time
to grow up and so whatever we build, we
should not have any expectation of
rolling it out too far other than our
community. So I want to just share this
sobering experience I had with Claude
just divide coding um a local first um
file sharing app.
&gt;&gt; Oh just really briefly so we understand
did you do it with in Xcode or on the
web all of it?
&gt;&gt; This is um a NodeJS code written through
Claude in chat and just using a free
account no paid account with Claude.
Okay,
&gt;&gt; so the sobering experience is that the
thing worked. I tested it on two
machines at home and I was able to send
files to different directories using
whole punches um hyper core protocol.
&gt;&gt; Okay, thank you.
&gt;&gt; So yeah, so what got me is if if I was a
naive developer and I didn't know what
questions to ask about this technology,
that would just open up a can of worms.
So the things I I now I had asked these
previously and I gotten some decent
answers but I knew to ask these
questions about security. How much
quality assurance is required to inspect
this code and its dependencies and gain
an awareness of potential threat
exposures that the user would need to be
aware of. Um the data is encrypted in
transit but not at rest and the user has
to be responsible for that. Um, keys
need to be shared with peers in private
channels outside of the application. And
if this is for a company, they'd need to
engineer a VPN for the users of this
application. And then privacy. Um, if
any of the peers are subject to GDPR or
data sovereignty regulations, then
there's risks of non-compliance.
And also, it may be impossible to delete
data if it's already been replicated.
And the user needs to know how to
mitigate these risks if that applies to
them. And there's IP anonymity issues
because in a distributed hash table your
IP is needed to find another peer and
infrastructure. Um these use appendon
logs and that could consume storage and
if you're not managing that properly
that can grow quickly. So those are
things from my experience that before I
do anything with this app people need to
be aware of. But a naive person just
saying, "Hey, I code this now. It works.
Roll it out. Put it in production."
Yeah. So I just wanted to say that on
the record. [laughter] Thanks.
&gt;&gt; Thank you, Eric. And Tom, if you can
hold your fire a little bit longer,
Mark, you said data extraction at the
edges of federated systems are a
concern. What did you mean by that?
Right. So, um once you start hosing
stuff around the federated system, um it
it is who knows where on what server.
Well, you may know who's in the
federated system, but it's gone from
your control.
&gt;&gt; Um now, that that probably doesn't
matter if you're just, you know,
chitchatting between a group of people,
but once it moves to anything less
trivial than that, it actually has uh it
actually has some implications. This is
one of the things I'm working with Gabo
on his sort of seed system is that um
trying to trying to understand the
modern equivalent of of sort of
copyright control um within a a
federated system because if you have if
you're an organization let's say you're
a regional government or something and
you're sharing between the departments
you want to have some sense of where
that information is going. If it's just
everywhere, that's that's actually a
genuine problem. Um because someone that
only has to share it with somebody else
and it's it's gone because you can never
get it back. So you you you could say,
okay, well, if you do that, only ever
use a client server system and you got
much more locked down. But
&gt;&gt; no, that's a rather draconian approach
to it. But that's the answer to your
question.
&gt;&gt; Okay. No, that's a fair point. But of
course, if you distribute your thoughts
as a PDF, it's it's because the the term
federated system, I think, is a very
specific case and worthwhile and
interesting, but this may not be
federated. This is simply I said
something. Do you want a piece of it?
Um, Tom,
yeah, as usual, I'm going to throw a
wrench into this a little bit. Uh,
so I want to turn this on its head
though because I'm I'm hearing a theme
here and I'm just sort of listening to
what everybody else's comments are. And
um one of the things that I see as a con
constant conversation among the more
technical mindset people as I was
referring to earlier is this need to
adapt to the machine as opposed to
adapting the machine to the human which
is something obviously that is at the
core of Doug Angleart's thinking that
you know we if we're going to augment he
didn't say augment machine intelligence
he said augment human intelligence and
that's significant right Um
but the interesting thing is I think AI
starts to flip that on its head. Uh and
the easiness or the the simplicity of
creating basic applications is no longer
the issue. It's exactly the kind of
things that Mark is referring to but
also everybody else has referred to at
some level and that is system design.
And to be able to step back and think at
that level is hard. I mean when I say
system design I mean systems upon
systems design not just the system
within the application but as Eric was
saying all of these other systems that
are tangential to those systems which
some companies and some institutions
depending on the system you're in uh
will find essential right and others uh
may find trivial right for the same
reason but you know that I think is the
future and I mean I wrote a I I put
links to it in there I wrote a thing
about a year ago saying you know we're
entering what a true maker world. You
know, maker maker spaces are cool, but
there are barriers to entry. You know,
if you're going to use um
uh computer uh uh god, I can't remember
the word now. Computer-driven machines,
you have to know how to use the design
software. You know, you have to be
fluent in AutoCAD or other sorts of
things. Well, with AI, you don't
anymore. in order to generate co
generate create applications.
The point of generating code is to
create applications. The point of
creating applications is not to generate
code. It's to do something useful,
right? So code is just a means to an end
there. Uh and so um uh that's the
technical level. That's the low-level
technical stuff, the foundational level.
Let me say it that way. Uh uh that AI
can safely take over. Now what I've been
working on in the last few weeks that
I've sort of you know been
just uh uh cogitating on is to what
extent can we use the machine to upgrade
the human and how hard is that and that
means that can we take ordinary coders
and turn them into systems designers and
how do we get to that point so it's not
just about wow I just wrote a cool app
which you did um but how [clears throat]
does that integrate into the needs of my
personal system, personal environment or
to the needs of my group's environment,
whatever that group may be, company,
classroom, institution, whatever you
want to call it. Um, and so that I think
is a a real that's the real challenge
here. Um, and you know, these questions
all seem to be asking the same thing
though is that wow, this is great, but
how does it fit in here? How does it fit
in here? How does it connect to this?
How does it connect to this? Well, for
one thing, maybe you can help get AI to
start brainstorming that with you, but
you're going to have to ultimately think
about what that looks like, you know,
ultim and that's why we all have to
become system designers.
I'm I agree with you, Tom, but I'm a
little surprised at the timing of your
comments because that's exactly what
this is. It's a system design.
You know, this is a an approach, a
philosophy, a document format, an
approach to sharing an implementation.
And one thing I was really hoping and I
think we get to is there are all these
yes ends. No one has said yes, but but
all these yes ends. And
that's one thing. But let me ask you,
are are you guys also
Hang on, I'm going to share again.
Okay.
Okay. Just to so you guys can see how it
works in Xcode.
Mark or someone else marks because
you're specifically an expert or someone
else. Think of a view of documents like
this or communications that might be
useful either in from your own
experience or from Doug or Ted. Just
think of what of one.
&gt;&gt; Um, sorry. I I don't use Xcode. I'm not
a programmer.
&gt;&gt; No, no, that's not what I asked you to
do. I didn't ask you to use Xcode. I'm
going to show you something in Xcode.
what I want you to do in normal human
language to say to me
um because and this is this is what I'm
blown away by here on the left all these
views
which are modular
if you now tell me a view like this is a
a connected thing right if you tell me
just
&gt;&gt; oh okay I have an idea um I'd like a
view that tells me how much has been
changed from the previous superseded
version. So was a 10% change or was 80%
of it changed
&gt;&gt; and after that I have I've got one as
well for you now now.
&gt;&gt; So this then should be shown when you're
reading a superseded version. Right.
&gt;&gt; Right.
&gt;&gt; Uh
&gt;&gt; here's how much the new version changed.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Okay. So, I just wrote please make
a view which tells me how much has um
make a a button not not a view because a
view would be in a a different area. Can
you do that? The team is watching
watching you live.
&gt;&gt; No
&gt;&gt; way to make it feel insecure.
&gt;&gt; Exactly. Right. So, so, so this is the
absolute madness of this. So
that's how I've been coding. That's the
level of dialogue,
right? I'm not a programmer. And so all
the the human thing where you get tell
them I'm watching and you you kind of
have a human anthropo, you know, we
anthropomorphize everything.
&gt;&gt; But look at what it's actually trigger
it in useful ways to do things. And you
don't need to phrase it exactly that way
to get those responses, but it's far
easier for us to do it. Pretend
&gt;&gt; so
I'm sorry for talking over you both but
please talk but just have a look at the
responses
&gt;&gt; of how it's saying what it understood
and what it's going to do. It's amazing.
Please continue Peter and then Mark
because Peter I didn't hear everything.
I'm so sorry.
&gt;&gt; Oh no no no keep going on with what
you're doing because you're doing what
the vibe coding is the term for it.
Although it's a lot more than that. I
think there's a it's coding with massive
assistance, but you're you're we
anthropomorphize everything. I mean, we
give ships names and the software,
you're talking to it as though you're
talking to a program, and that's
perfectly legit way of doing it, but if
you actually were to figure out the
keywords, you can get more succinct and
you become like um like a mentat in Dune
or something like that where you talk
shortorthhand to the computers. Yeah,
&gt;&gt; computers are illegal. Did you hear
about the
&gt;&gt; Butlerian jihad?
&gt;&gt; Humans are computers, [laughter] but
&gt;&gt; I've definitely one of the reason it's
interesting to see that, you know, oh,
look, people are watching, you know,
okay, you know, does it care? Do you
think it cares? Well, it doesn't. It has
no care.
&gt;&gt; It may not have a different style of
prompts for
&gt;&gt; it. It may not care in a human way, but
it may, as you said, prompt or deal with
it in a different way. maybe more
succinct or flamboyant because it it
does know about today's meeting,
right? So, here it's done all kinds of
fun
because when I ask for this button, I
didn't explicitly say how it should go
and do the maths to compare those two.
&gt;&gt; So, we're going to have to test it and
see how rubbish it is. And then I look
very much forward to Mark's uh maybe
more traditional view rather than button
in there. Both are interesting. Right
now, the button in the header document,
I'll put it. Yeah, sorry Mark. Go ahead.
&gt;&gt; No, I just say yes, it is a it is a view
suggestion. So when you get when when
you're when while this is running an
observation actually prompted by what
Peter was saying, one of the things I
found is I I play around with claw code
a lot and it's sort of fine but I realiz
I wasn't doing a coding problem and
actually it was getting in the way
because I ended up in a sense trying to
do trying to turn a non-coding problem
into a coding perspective which was not
useful at all. I'll keep talking I'm
going to get bored and as a result I
We lost him, didn't we?
&gt;&gt; Of course, the delivery arrives when I'm
at the door. Right. Okay.
&gt;&gt; You broke up as you're walking away.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Sorry. Okay. Sorry. The gist is
that um I find if I go into Claude uh
Claude chat uh I get a much more
sensible conversation out of it. Um and
I I tend to
the other thing is when it makes a
mistake which we all do I deliberately
stop and ask it the nature what it
understands of the nature of this
mistake it makes not you've been a bad
person not anthropomorphize you're
saying good bad say you did that thing
you did this thing which I wouldn't
expect a human to do what was the causal
nature of that and actually it's quite
articulate and it will come back uh it's
what's really good because it it it's
really good expos ing the flaws in the
in the structure. So, one of the things
that's really interesting is it can't do
parallel context like a human mind can.
&gt;&gt; So, when you ask it about a subject, it
it what you don't see if you do it as a
code interface, it just runs off and
does a lot of basically XY comparisons.
&gt;&gt; Mark guess at the at the things needed.
Yeah,
&gt;&gt; this is the Peter button. What changed?
Let's see if it works.
Okay, so it's in a popup. So, we
probably wanted more,
but it did find one paragraph edited.
So, this is when, you know, we would
iterate and say
um on
Okay, that comes close, but I wanted to
know what percent of the document
changed. So saying one paragraph edited
on a one paragraph document would be
different than one paragraph edited out
of a 50page paper.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And I'm only going to do this one
more because we're going to go to Mark.
But the point is you can keep asking and
keep telling and keep changing. But for
instance, the um the little icon after
the link for the whether it's a stretch
text or or whatever it is was below. No,
I wanted it here. Right? So you just
keep telling it. So similar here now
it's trying to change the size of the
dialogue which is very minor. Also add
one percentage but Peter you should
absolutely get this code put it in your
own Xcode and do a proper Peter change
view and if it doesn't work that's also
a learning experience right
and hopefully soon we will have it
working. And Mark do you want to
describe to me what what you your view
would be? Yeah, I was going to say uh
actually say show me a view of a map of
all the agreement uh connections
&gt;&gt; agreements. We have disagreements
&gt;&gt; agreement. So uh it can choose how it
wants to lay out. Um but what I want to
see basically I want to see the
relationship map of all the notes that
were in agreement.
&gt;&gt; The problem is
&gt;&gt; one of the things Sorry, go ahead.
&gt;&gt; No, I was going to say I can't give you
this build unless you build it yourself
because of the beta nonsense, but please
continue.
&gt;&gt; Oh no, no, no. I know. I understand
that. No, I was just trying to, you
know, you said what's something you
might like to do and so here's the thing
that we sort of know, this is a known
kind of thing to do. It's interesting to
see without giving it too much of a
steer as to what it does. So, uh, of
course, within the corpus of all the
notes, uh, it won't be one network
because not everything is connected. So,
does it choose to show you all the maps
or just one map?
&gt;&gt; But you can tell that, right?
&gt;&gt; You should probably be allowed to.
Yes. Yes. But it's also really I found
to be really useful is is to allow it to
have a chance on its own to see what it
thinks because that's really instructive
as well because it it shows you where I
bias is the wrong word perhaps, but it
shows you where it's it's it sort of
guess as to what the the thing is.
Sometimes it's just marvelously good.
Other times it's outright bonkers, which
is always then a cause for another
conversation. So, okay. So what caused
you to think that that was you know uh
an ideal solution and that then again is
instructive in use of the AI?
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. But one thing that is really
important here is
I'm not trying to big up the AI analysis
part. What I'm trying to big up is the
AI in building a thing that is no longer
AI.
Right. So the your questions mark your
concerns are completely valid is exactly
what we should do while making these
things but the key thing is if it does
it wrong it's of course up to us to
check and then change it or if we get to
a point where it just cannot do it with
the data or the logic delete it but look
how quickly it was to change this
and it says plus seven words that's what
it did but I haven't asked it for more
of course it also did you see um what it
says this um earlier up here it said uh
because you're doing this live let me
make sure it looks really good
um okay so Mark um
&gt;&gt; but that's really good I mean that's
that's that's a very good example of the
kind of thing it does really well so a
little validator I shared with you um
what was very impressive is that
although the coding was probably
actually quite a small percentage of the
problem that was actually being solved
which was essentially a llinter for
naive users who've been forced to use
Latte to submit a paper. So that at
least when they open their paper, they
don't get 400 uh formatting results just
for the bib take alone. Um but all the
all the sort of coloring and the layout
and the font, all that was done um by
Claude and I didn't touch it because
frankly it was good enough. Um but the
what was really interesting is um had
that epiphany happen several times.
We're working on something with Claw
said, "Well, okay. So, what's what model
are you working off?" It says it's like
the two drunks in the car. Oh, I thought
you were driving and when we but you
know when we actually burrow down to the
bottom so actually it was this document
which turned out to be actually man
months of my work doing the underlying
logic which it then turned it very
usefully and very you know reasonably
succinctly down to the fact that we even
got the creative commons uh ident is
done as SVG. So that's not an external
file either. So it's really really nice
and it does that sort of thing really
well. But you have to remember it's read
a lot more software manuals than you you
have.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And basically and its brain cycle speed
is much faster than yours. So it is
wondrous to see but also you should hold
on the fact that if it didn't happen you
should be really concerned because you
ought to expect it to do this sort of
thing because that for it is pretty
trivial. That's not knowledge and it
will tell you it doesn't it you know
it's just a it's just a probability
matrix word followed by word.
&gt;&gt; Yes. Yes. But the thing is probability
and AI and all of that is interesting
and there lots of discussions around AI
but here we have the the potential of
a system that we can use instead of
email or Slack or all of those guys,
right? That we can have fun with. We can
implement old hypertext ideas, new
ideas, whatever. The the excitement
here, I think, is more let's create what
we think we can
and just just run with it. I mean, it's
like the most incredible toy ever,
right? How many of you have Xcode, by
the way,
&gt;&gt; Tom?
&gt;&gt; I have it in installed because it things
asked for it, but I didn't use it.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Uh Mark Peter any you know Peter
Wasco has right
&gt;&gt; yeah the same
&gt;&gt; an older version I used to use it uh for
work but no longer get back to it
&gt;&gt; because basically everything I do is for
the web so since I'm not using any of
Apple's frameworks I don't even bother
getting into Xcode
&gt;&gt; soc languages does Xcode work with by
the way
&gt;&gt; well it's Mac so it's basically Swift
libraries and you know Mac goodness.
&gt;&gt; Got it.
&gt;&gt; Um yeah, I mean it
&gt;&gt; I'm working mainly in Python these days.
That's why I was asking.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; Uh because this is in um unfortunately
Oops. Let's do it here.
This is beta because it's for 27 uh as
in Mac OS 27 which is really annoying.
But it would be really fun if you guys
could just install it because
Okay. Anyone else have an idea for a
view? And we don't have that many
documents, which is really annoying. Say
something really ridiculous, please.
&gt;&gt; Oh, can it give us a readability score?
&gt;&gt; No, because that's boring. That that's
just a
Yeah.
&gt;&gt; What do you What do you call exciting? I
mean, that's that's the unguessable
thing.
&gt;&gt; What what I mean is um
Okay, no, I'm laughing here because we
wrote that kind of um discussion. I
mean, so here it it's beginning to do a
graph for us, right? Which is just
really wild. I don't even know how it
works. I haven't bothered much with it.
It's an for me, it's an early test
version, but it it is
um I do a lot of my thinking with the
regular claude, but these are not
connected. They don't share knowledge of
of me and my work. So, I had the regular
Claude make a document for this claude,
so it understands my philosophy and
research.
So the way that this graph is made is
based on my earlier work on what should
be visible and all of that kind of
stuff, right? So so we we can we can do
all kinds of features. But um and we
even have AI insights and and stuff like
that, but it won't be much because we
hardly have any cuz it's just me and
fake tester accounts. But maybe a a
special hypertextual view or or
something like or maybe names of the
authors jumping up and down or almost
something similar.
&gt;&gt; Well, that was why that was why I
suggested well, you know, show us the
agreement network.
&gt;&gt; Yeah,
&gt;&gt; you've got link types. So, you've got
links and you've got link types. So, you
have all the bits you need to make that
&gt;&gt; I've got an idea. How about a view where
any words that have high emotional
impact get bolded? So, it's just like
plain neutral tech talk and then you
start to go into a rant saying, "I
really hate this about Apple." That
sentence would immediately jump out and
be put in bold. So, it would stand out
from the plain academic discourse around
it. So, I want to look for the emotional
statements that might be inside of an
otherwise dry document.
&gt;&gt; Okay? have them bold.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. That that's super simple. Um
add a button
on top of a publish document
to highlight positive.
Boom. Yeah, that can be done. But what I
really hope to do is is get you the
actual app and so you can make your own
module views if you want. But also if we
just start like the discussion that
Eric's a part of uh having a discussion
via this use it like email
then maybe we'll get to a threshold of
categorically learning that this
approach is absolute rubbish and we can
write an article about that. Or maybe we
find some workflow of everybody owns the
document that we share because it's
basically communication via PDF. That's
what academics do. This is just more
streamlined and no publisher and
quicker. That's it.
&gt;&gt; But do academics I I just like to pick.
So do academics converse by PDF? I'm I'd
like to be I'd like to use it. Convince
me of that argument.
&gt;&gt; Citations.
&gt;&gt; Sorry,
&gt;&gt; that's what I mean. I mean citations
they cite each other.
&gt;&gt; Okay. But citations are not a not a a
facet of um PDF. PDF is basically an
encapsulation of paper and citations go
back to printademic.
&gt;&gt; You could send right to the person in
dust off and get the book sent to you,
you know, 3 weeks later by first class
post.
&gt;&gt; No, you can't anymore because they
aren't printed.
&gt;&gt; Indeed. No, but Mark, what I'm saying is
simply as is that serious academics,
they publish through paper or PDF or
whatever and the threading of the
conversation is through basic citations,
you know.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. But it's also they've already
moved beyond I mean if you look at the
publishers now so PDF I think I would be
very surprised if it it becomes more
than a copy of record quite quickly.
You're already seeing people pivot PDF
partly because it gives you accurate
read because you you don't want to read
a 12page two column documents on one of
these.
&gt;&gt; You mean to HTML
&gt;&gt; HTML? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. But the problem
with that Mark is first of all it's not
happening according to the ACM library
board. The users don't want it in large
numbers and secondly you still have the
problem of local first. If it's HTML it
has to be hosted somewhere.
You can't drag an HTML page anymore. You
could in the old days onto a browser and
it would render. It doesn't do that
anymore because it's all
&gt;&gt; No, in fairness. Yeah, but be careful of
your assumptions you're nesting there.
You're just assuming a certain type of
page design. But as you've for instance
been showing with the origami text if
you build it that the the thing about
it's really interesting too. This is
something Claude came back to is I
thought Claude would want to use
markdown. But Claude was very insistent
that no, he did not want to use
markdown. Why? Because it's ambiguous.
whereas it understands the rules of HTML
and even if only users are part of it,
it's much more robust than markdown
which was a came as a surprise to me
because you would think now that
markdown is the cool place to be but um
so it's fine for for simple output but
actually for not um structured
information and don't forget and this is
something we learned from Brandon
is that
&gt;&gt; let's not go on to we're having a
session on this let's not spend too much
of the session saying why right for
those we're understanding what
&gt;&gt; yeah but there there's a lot of talk of
why not do HTML and let's not do that
today let's just have fun with this and
if it turns out it's not useful it's not
useful um while we're waiting on the
build um Eric please go ahead
&gt;&gt; yeah so it would be interesting to ask
it a philosophical question such as how
would Ted Nelson's zigzag ideas how how
could they enhance the presentation of
this app.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I'm happy to ask that question.
Um, it's already discussed potential of
doing that uh because it's talked about
uh transclusion which I don't think it
fully understands but then hardly anyone
does.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, just so people understand,
zigzag is a multi-dimensional
data structure and you can rotate in
different dimensions on the axes and I'm
thinking it could be useful for reducing
clutter in 3D of your metadata.
&gt;&gt; So, just that thought's in my mind. I'm
not sure how to take it forward yet.
&gt;&gt; I don't think anyone does. I think even
Ted was kind of he he kind of boosted
that out there and he got the
implementation done and it just didn't
it landed with a big thud because no one
could figure out what it is.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, there was a paper from Southampton
which um classified zigzag in terms of a
graph, a specific type of graph. So
yeah, I mean I [clears throat]
&gt;&gt; it's a graph theory stuff kind of pulled
out of graph theory into Ted Nelson
talk, you know, with special terms and
the negative positive forward links and
all that kind of stuff just to make it
confusing when it's graph theoretical
stuff that's pretty well known
[clears throat] actually.
&gt;&gt; Right. But could that
&gt;&gt; but when I look at it I see graph
theoretical stuff that's more advanced
than what he was positing.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, sure. But it might be good to see
what CLA come up with here because
Zigzag partitioned it into this
&gt;&gt; nextg hyperlink, you know, the nextG Ted
Nelson, you know, and whatever the hell
it is.
&gt;&gt; And so that'd be kind of cool to see
where it goes with that because a whole
bunch of people jumped onto it. It
became a thing.
&gt;&gt; It's got [clears throat] the the
&gt;&gt; it's like the Steve Jobs reality bubble,
you know, that kind of thing. Ted Nelson
had the same kind [clears throat] of
thing around it. But let's just think in
spatial computing, if you had that GZZ
prototype in a spatial environment where
you could have like sectors of your
vision with different structures that
you manipulate in different dimensions
and then you could rotate your swivel
chair to other sectors. Just let's dream
about that a little. Yeah, there's a lot
of good work to do there. And but I
think you can get a create a 2D
projection of that, you know, a graph in
a browser, something that would be
useful to build, you know, the
multi-dimensional thing in 3D. Great.
But let's do a 2D version and say make
it something that helps us understand
what this network of documents. I I
don't think you have enough documents to
make a good hypertext thing here with
relationships. I don't know the amount
of test documents there in the So, I'm
not sure what claw to come up with if
you'd ask it.
&gt;&gt; Okay, just throwing it out.
&gt;&gt; Use a zigzag.
&gt;&gt; So, guys, um we don't have that much
time left, but
let's see if we can uh and Tom, you're
obviously next, but transition away from
why
just so what I've shown you is literally
wet clay. You know, this is Samaran Kao
form, right?
What the heck do we want it to do? You
know, what are your dreams of a
communication medium where you make a
statement, share it with um colleagues
and friends and it can be annotated or
not. It can have tags all whatever or
not. And then as you build up this
conversation, you can look at it in
useful ways. If you email me since
that's all we have now before next
session and by the way next Monday, I'm
not sure I may be traveling. uh it may
not be possible but very soon I'll try
to to build it and if it turns out that
this
u version is built on sand it's not a
problem we we built something else but
let's talk about dreams and ideas are
not um problems Tom
yeah I mean u I don't I don't think this
is a problem I think this is an
opportunity but I think a lot of times
we as we as we're having these
conversations We're talking about things
like citations and PDFs. Those are um
old paradigm
uh touchston.
&gt;&gt; Absolutely.
&gt;&gt; And and so for instance, that thing I
just put in there about zigzag, I have a
library with um most of Ted Nelson's
stuff in it and I just ran a query
against it and I said, "Hey, you know
what's zigzag?" And it told me that, you
know, is that correct or not? Maybe,
maybe not. It's probably incomplete. But
I I also have links back to the original
sources of that, right? And so, you
know, when we have these academic
discussions, I mean, remember list
serves,
um, when we have these academic
discussions, um, we're operating as if
the extent of the conversation space is
the other people's brains within the
discussion. But what if we think about
that in the larger sense of the other
people's brains in the in in in the
universe of having all having libraries
of Ted Nelson stuff or Doug stuff or or
combinations of all of these sorts of
things which I have. And the point I'm
trying to make here is that the the
things that you see as anchors
um are not really anchors. They're
anchors that are legacies of the old
paradigm. Uh which may be necessary.
&gt;&gt; What do you mean? Which what what you
mean by anchors?
&gt;&gt; They're print they're b everything we've
PDFs and citations are legacies of print
media. You don't need
&gt;&gt; cit citation is not a legacy of a print
media. Citation just means to bring
something forth. It's just a connection.
It's just this is where I got
&gt;&gt; I'm saying that but I'm saying the
written form of citations or legacy of
media because because you needed to walk
back to the original source where that's
why we need and that's why we need to
change it and that's I strongly agree
that that's a priority for us of how do
we deal with addressability. Absolutely.
&gt;&gt; And as as Mark said, you know, you would
you would write to somebody in in in in
Germany and they would send you a copy
of their paper. uh if you could you know
that that's sneaker sneaker net
essentially [laughter]
um but you know we now have an access to
a net that is infinitely pliable in a
way that even the Tim Berners Lee
internet wasn't because it's a network
of ideas that uh we can construct
reconstruct on our own and in a
conversation space like this or the
document you're saying uh can be used to
uh connect with other people's libraries
to share. Right. Yes.
&gt;&gt; So um and so this changes the landscape
&gt;&gt; and I think one of the things that we
have to be thinking about as we're
building these things is to what extent
can we ask hard questions about is this
landscape even appropriate anymore. I
mean there's some aspects of it that
will be. Don't get me wrong. I'm not
saying throw out the baby with the
bathwater, but I am saying, you know, we
we constantly dragging along these boat
anchors based on our own experience and
time learning that um don't necessarily
apply anymore. No,
&gt;&gt; absolutely, 100%. That's part of what we
need to to to redo. Mark,
&gt;&gt; uh yeah, a quick one on zigzag. If you
can find uh my old supervisor, Les Carr,
if you can find an internet archive
version of his university pages, he had
the London subway network in zigzag and
it was actually quite cool because you
could use you could explore zigzag
something that's kind of mindbending in
a paradigm you understood which was
moving your way around the subway. Um so
that is quite interesting. One of the
things that struck me I remember when I
was studying a look at the zigzag is one
of the problems also is that uh it's a
really cool idea about how do you build
stuff for it. So one of the problems is
is is actually putting the the
information into it. So it is
interesting and I I don't know
somebody's comment earlier is yeah if
you think about the n-dimensional
um sort of number space of an LLM well
isn't that a sort of n-dimensional
zigzag as another way of looking at so
is this are we now in some weird uh non-
nucleidian sort of um paradigm of trans
of moving through space and then the
other thing was quickly following on
really what from Tom was saying is that
um another thing that's that's
remarkably legacy is something that's
very trendy at the moment is block level
addressing that doesn't really have a I
haven't found a sort of the canonical uh
uh description of that. Everyone talks
about it. We seem to roughly know what
it means which normally means a
paragraph or a line of text. Um but
again that's sort of print isn't it?
Because it goes back to a paragraph. Um
and when an interesting thing that comes
out of citations is people very quickly
tend to go for the closest citation
because mainly because that's older and
it's very important humanities. I want
you know sentence four in this version
of that inkabler but actually a lot of
our our referencing is remarkably
fluidly scoped.
So if you actually look at the way sort
of people are doing things a lot of the
provenence is a massive overload of
stuff we don't need because actually
it's way too tightly scoped. So people
have pressed very hard on the pre
provenence button because that's nice
you can code that we got blockchain all
kinds of cool funky uh technology to do
that. what we don't have is something
that can do the wider thing. So, no, no,
no, I'm referring to that subject or I'm
referring to all editions of that book
or I'm referring to uh you know that
whole conference. Um that still is
actually much harder to do. Um but it
still strikes me as absolutely part of
the the sort of citation linking we
want. And actually this sort of you know
an interesting idea that comes out of
this sort of mention of zigzag this idea
well let's blow up all the dimensions is
yeah you know you're you're almost
drawing a circle around a bit of of
space and saying that bit there and I'll
stop there
&gt;&gt; Peter.
&gt;&gt; Okay I just had to get Yes Peter go
ahead.
&gt;&gt; Yeah I have an idea for a higher level
question to ask Claude. Um, let's ask
Claude, what would it look like if NLS
Augment and Zigzag had a love child?
&gt;&gt; I did ask Claude a similar question.
What would it take? This is based on Tom
last week. I asked it u what would it
take to make NLS now, but um Peter, I
think that's a good idea. You you should
do that. Um now Peter it did do your
function but it relied on the Apple's on
demand um sentiment um analysis which is
just medium.
So it did it but not in a really big
way. But now going forward
um
what's what actual things so we're
really addressing Eric's question here.
Let's say that
um
okay who will critically review all the
AI output. Um with all respect Eric for
this particular work I find that not a
pertinent thing because I'm not really
talking about adding AI analysis to the
app necessarily. What I'm talking about
is having the AI build a nonAI system.
So the AI really becomes like a um
junior programmer. Well, maybe not even
junior.
So if we take Eric's starting question
of and we added this thing, let's assume
that I can build this thing and get it
to you guys. Uh anybody here not use a
Mac?
Okay. So Peter, you would have to build
your own client obviously,
but I'm sure there's a claude code who
could do that with you. because
obviously this claude would be able to
give all the specifications and answer
all the questions.
What would we actually want to be able
to do?
I'm going to walk through a bit and
you're going to interrupt me whenever
you want to. So, you have a point you
want to make to the group and it's not
necessarily a published article,
something you would normally send in a
group email.
And how do you want that to be? You
right now it's subject and body. There's
no other information, right?
Would you want to say it's up for
comment or would you like to say this is
a statement I'm making to the world?
Does that matter to you? Maybe not.
Right? Do you want to say it's for
attention to people or do you just want
it to go to the community? These are
options you should have. And then when
you receive one of these through
whatever means you should have options
for how to read it by itself
and also whether you want to read it at
all. Maybe it's someone you muted cuz
they talk too much rubbish or maybe it's
someone you think is super important or
someone has said it's for your
attention. All of these things should be
thought about. But once you get past the
writing a card, as we might call it, and
reading a card, then we're getting into
more interesting things of, oh damn,
I've been in this community for 6 months
now and I have a thousand messages.
How do we want to go through them? We
can actually experiment with that.
One of the things that I've been doing
recently that's kind of interesting is
is actually using the AI to analyze
the the messages themselves. In other
words, uh look for patterns and things
like that. Um in the terms of my
students, what I'm trying to do is
measure what level of learning they've
achieved in their conversations with the
AI.
But Tom, okay, I just I just think we
need to scope the AI really carefully
because
&gt;&gt; um there's absolutely with the system
even as it stands today in terms of
programming, it's trivial to add a view
that says exactly that that can be done.
&gt;&gt; But in terms of things that aren't based
on I want a view where the AI does this
are there other views like we want to
see a map of agreements. Do we want to
see it 2D or 3D? Do we want to see flow?
Do we want to see it personbased or like
Mike what Mark was talking about
subject? You know, like hypertext as a
general thing. That that's interesting.
&gt;&gt; Be kind of fun to send in the chat logs
from the Zoom sessions.
&gt;&gt; That that is why I have um added
um AI on behalf of me.
what you say is perfectly well uh Tom.
So what we should probably do is find a
way whereby all of you are known
entities.
So when it comes across what we will
call a chat transcript,
it should ascribe each bit you say to
you rather than AI or me. That's a
that's a good um
Okay, let let me see if I can begin.
afraid it does sound from what you were
saying earlier saying looking at the
relationships and things it does keep
spiraling back towards some of the ideas
that came out of spatial heritics which
&gt;&gt; yes
&gt;&gt; I'm surprised actually haven't been more
used in in in XR which seems a logical
place to do it but um so so one of the
things because paper one of the reasons
I've been thinking about soal tools of
thought a lot at the moment paper I'm
doing is is that and it turns out that
it's the king's new suit of clothes you
know tools of thought has become a
marketing term that's generally
understood but doesn't actually describe
anything. And there are lots of things
that are actually on a on a decreasing
cone around a very tailorist western
perception of efficiency in
organization. Um but what they're all
talking about is exactly the opposite
wanting to find serendipity and and and
non and sort of nonlinear relationships
between things. Um so there are whole
sort of there are whole parts of the
world whose whose uh methods of notation
and things we haven't even sort of
looked into because of the accident of
birth of you know stuff basically coming
out of of of the postwar boom and
Barbara and everything. Um though there
is a link you know there is a link in
the two arms of structuralism sort of
slightly underneath it. But it it it is
interesting just that dichotomy that all
the time well the one thing that keeps
coming out is what people describe
themselves wanting with these thinking
tools and what they build are sort of in
a sense increasingly different
in in where they're going because you
know they're built to very different
things. So, a really interesting thing
might be to uh ask Claude to make you
something on uh maybe one of the Chinese
or Japanese noting systems that have
very different ideas about flow and
organization and and temporar uh and and
the temporal axis.
&gt;&gt; That's also a very good question. Uh if
you can please read what I'm writing
here.
What do you think? Should I ask it this?
This is about the transcript, of course.
Let me see what it says. This is a
question, not a command for it to build
anything.
Looking at different notation systems,
Mark is absolutely a very interesting
idea and uh I I do encourage all of you
if you want to send me an email with a
view or a thing and I will try to do it.
In fact, maybe I should even film a
video of it happening and then you can
see if you like it the way it works. I
&gt;&gt; the most impressive thing I've seen
recently in those sort of regards is
someone who uh German philosophy
professor in Yaina with to his speaks
quite good English but he thinks it's
not good. So he dictates to I think it's
whisper vibe whisper or whatever it's
called one of these translate things. He
speaks in German to that which speaks to
Claude which translates it and says do
you understand? He reads it back in
English then commits him and he used
that despite him definitely being
someone who is not of a coding or
technical background say he was a
philosophy professor uh and he looked at
as it happened Tinderbox and he in very
short order had a node uh website that
showed three visualizations plus the
selected note all in one UI and I
thought that's amazing and the
impressive part was that the hyper the
hyperbolic view the sort of network link
layout and the map had been done by the
by Claude basically pausing pictures
from the screen because of course it
can't see uh and it it can't conceive
what it sees what it or what it tells
you it does is it looks for spaces and
it uses reasoning. So but apart from
reading text which is doesn't really
help you when you're trying to
understand what a picture means. So in
the way we might illustrate a book to
say a picture and we think oh that
explains it. Claude can't really use
that meaningfully claim whoever because
it can't see it can find there's a blob
in the top leftand corner and a blob in
the bottom right hand corner but it
doesn't have the same doesn't get the
same cognition as we do from that. So
that bit's really amazing. I mean, it
really is mind-blowing that without
without having the same sense of
understanding the visuals we do, it
could take essentially a very visual
view uh and recreate it functionally. Um
that did make me did make me sit up.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, that's very cool. I remember you
told me um that story. It's it's very
impressive. So, it's going to try to do
this now
and uh it's building it and then um I'm
going to say here's an actual example
data. Try to use that. Let's see what we
get
cuz importing is obviously as important
as exporting because we can't expect all
the everyone to write even if all of us
decided to use this as a primary
messaging app. We can't expect everybody
to sit down and write. So it can already
import markdown and word and of course
author.
So let's see what it says. Now
there is uh of course in the system um a
kind of a contact list. You can sort by
author and so on. So that should
probably work across here as well. If we
have uh one Peter Demetrius, we have one
Peter Demetrius.
I'm looking here, Peter, while this is
uh happening on your comment from
Claude. The um
the global
workspace and all of that. I I think uh
Eric emailed about local first and I
think in today's overdistributed uh
environment that's a really important
notion.
Oh, I brought up in chat the idea of
each of us curating our personal
selection of documents locally and then
using technology to replicate it to the
PE peer-to-peer to each other and uh
then maybe there's a way we can find
some common ground for future
discussions from that. But I like the
liquid author format that just the
functionality that author provides the
marking of text and the concept map. So
if we could align on a concept map for a
specific topic, maybe that's a starting
point.
&gt;&gt; Thank you. This is supposed to also
support
uh by the way these two lines here
origami do and format uh that means it's
updating its own documentation at the
same time.
So that's clickable from within the app.
Um
the author
model I'm glad you like it but I think
it's to hack together over time. I think
we have an opportunity to do something
cleaner here. This definitely needs to
store spatial data. Um, the way I think
we should store images, by the way, is
by mentions in the text where there is
an assumption of that they're either on
a server or in the same folder,
something like that. I'm not saying we
have to decide now, but the main thing
itself should be ridiculously simple as
it can be with spatial.
It's interesting what you say there Fred
about about the the special thing
because having watched the sort of map
emerge in author over the years I I've
watched it actually claw back to
something where in reality in a sense
someone start from a different place but
you know actually just letting anything
in the document be an object
potentially. In other words, it has it
has the capability to be something in
the space. uh you decide what you want
to see and you can hide it or show it or
whatever rather than in a sense having
to add things specifically because what
what tends to happen is you you then
have a sort of divide between the things
that are in map and out which is totally
unintentional but then makes it
difficult to see the whole because
having worked with a a similar sort of
map in a in a different application one
of the real joys and the thing that
everyone says about using it is no you
just look at the stuff you need to look
at so it's everything in a sense is just
an object within the system.
&gt;&gt; You guys have given me an opportunity to
show you what I'm most excited about
outside of this coding and that is in
here in the map in the definition. You
can now do this.
So it's a selected text in the term. If
you now do command or define it makes a
new dialogue for it.
I'm just writing that as a small thing,
right?
It makes me so excited to have this
because in my discussions with Claude,
Claude has pointed out that these
knowledge maps are useful for their
connections just like you've all been
saying, not for the nodes so much. So
therefore, you really shouldn't be able
to put something on the map without it
being connected.
So by having the ability
to um while you are writing
Oh, electronic literature. Okay, I
should define that.
&gt;&gt; Why does Claude say you shouldn't put
something on the map without it being
linked? I'd be interested to see the
justification of that.
&gt;&gt; It was saying other things, but what
what it meant was the linking. This is
primarily for students and learning. The
active linking to seeing connections is
an important part of the process. Now,
of course, spatial hypertext would lose
things and the the position itself is
valued. No question about that. So, this
is just an additional layer where
I made it so easy. So, you come across
XR and you realize I haven't actually
defined that.
Done. Right.
I've only now seen it. It's a new build
today. It excites the heck out of me
because if you can add things easily,
you can also discard things you don't
need easily because the overhead and the
cost is so small.
So that's kind of cool, right? Let's go
back.
&gt;&gt; In in answer to Mark's question and also
what you were saying, Froo, I think that
the use case is different. So, if you're
using this as a teaching tool, forcing
the students to put connections to the
links, that actually makes sense. If
you're using it as a brainstorming tool
with the rest of you guys, sometimes I
may want to throw something out that I
said, I think this has something to do
with it, but I can't figure it out. I
need Frodo to tell me how to do that or
where that connection is, or I need
Peter or somebody else to tell me where
that connection is.
&gt;&gt; Um, and so that in that sense, you
should be able to do it. So you should
probably have two modes. A teaching mode
and a thinking mode would be my
suggestion.
Have we lost Froo?
&gt;&gt; I had to get water, but I could still
hear you through the
&gt;&gt; You're absolutely right. But uh do you
remember
&gt;&gt; there's a feature for you to add a
toggle that says thinking mode or
teaching mode? Well, well, this is a
hugely important topic uh Tom because um
first of all when they made the Mac one
of the key points of a the mantra was no
modes to be modeless, right?
&gt;&gt; But the human brain has modes itself.
So what I'm trying to do is give you the
means through to do either and then to
provide kind of the framing where you
will use this or that tool. But let
let's see what's going on with um this
update here because I said um
it it's done the import of the
transcript. I gave it a real transcript
and now it's going to go through that
and analyze how we talk to each other
and then maybe we can have it as an
example cuz to to one of the things in
the community we've been fighting over
not against each other but as an issue
over the many years is is it Mark
Anderson or is it M. Anderson or is it
Mark Rollinsson Anderson? uh is it the
orchid ID who you know what represents
the person and there are many things
around it but if we can get to a
functional point is it Doug Engelbart
Dangelard Douglas Carl Engelbard blah
blah blah if we can see that person in
multiple places if we can now have a
means through which in our discussion
here which is happy in public we can
easily distribute and distinguish rather
what Eric has said
that's pretty
because then that can go into other
views.
&gt;&gt; I mean the challenge in the last seems
to me the disconnection between the
human relationship where we we just map
instantly in our mind between you know M
blogs and D blogs and all this sort of
thing and the different versions of a
name. Um and software is inability to do
the same because it's hardedged. You
can't guess in the same way. So you end
up at you end up with things like an ID.
you end up basically with a global ID
underneath because you can't escape that
because that's the only way the system
can know that this thing is the same as
that thing and then it can have a whole
[clears throat] cluster of metadata
hanging off it. Uh that's fine for a
system designer but humans don't really
roll that way. They don't want to think
of it in those terms and I think it's
that's the essential sort of um
challenge in the middle of that. So we
we have an answer at both ends. What we
don't have is a thing that that seems to
neatly connect in a way that we find
comfortable to use.
&gt;&gt; We do. I hope I think uh what I think we
can do is um in an address book, normal
computer address book, you can say
aliases and types of things. I think we
should just use that. Um, and here
what I think we should do is if I come
across now Tom Hayes as a speaker and a
transcript, I want to be able to
controlclick or whatever and it doesn't
know who that is to get a dialogue to
say who he is and that is a saved
contact in my knowledge base. So if he
publishes a document in the future, it's
Tom H.
Now he can mess it up and change the way
he writes his name or something and then
just like briefly as a human like you
say Mark that should be immediate.
Uh okay hang on we're running it. So
let's do file import.
Uh so we go I think it's a transcripts.
Okay.
Does it figure out who's who?
Let me see what it said.
Let me see. It doesn't look like it's
done anything useful.
Let me see.
I'm going to give it a bit of a
screenshot.
I can't see how actually can I control
click on them.
Got to add the please right everyone.
So screenshot
see what it says
cuz it's made some choices like I don't
really reply here.
It's up here. Control-click export or
delete. Well that's okay. hairs.
Um
anyway, the the principle we all know
and I and just thoroughly encourage you
to have fun with this. Uh Mark, do you
know my old app, Lisa?
&gt;&gt; So, anybody? Okay. So, Lisa uh liquid
information speaking assistant. It
speaks with a real human voice when you
get mail. So, I meant I made that 15 20
years ago as a it's a really nice app
because it's a sweet voice. It's a human
voice and um
let me see here.
It it redid it
just by looking at I gave it my the old
um
Hang on.
That's weird. I guess it's by uh so I
can run it and and it just works.
Well, you can't hear anything.
&gt;&gt; Just while we're waiting for that to
load.
&gt;&gt; Is this a simulation of the Lisa
computer?
Uh
test announcement.
&gt;&gt; You have a message from a friend.
&gt;&gt; Did you hear that?
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; So the the way it works is
uh contacts.
So under Mark I call him a fellow
student. Why not? Right. Mark would you
mind sending me an email please?
The whole point this was um recoded with
Claude and it uses those because those
voices are split and they're randomized
because there's more than one recording
all these little nicesties and it fully
uh fully worked.
See it's trying to work on the issue.
Right. Let me just send that.
&gt;&gt; You're having a really interesting
experience. When the techn sorry
&gt;&gt; no that was my fault. I turned it up
because of the announcement. Please go
on. So I I'm I'm a well I'm dyspractic
writer and a dyslexic reader. So I I
can't spot the my my fingers don't type
what my brain says and I can't read the
mistakes that I then make which is
interesting and embarrassing. But I use
the text expander a lot and just in
about the last week or so it just keeps
phasing out and phasing in when it
decides to do and it's made me realize
just how many expansions I use because
they've actually become the more
convenient muscle memory. Um, but it's
also a real reminder about, you know,
technology failure. So, it just slices
you off at the knees because all the
things that you suddenly used to do in
seconds, you know, can't do.
&gt;&gt; That's that's happened to me as the uh
Google I I use swipe texting. You know,
you move your finger across the keyboard
and it types. And it used to
[clears throat] guess really well.
Apparently, Google upgraded their AI or
it's not personalized enough. Now, it
misreads 90
20% of what I type in is wrong where it
used to get it right. Now, whether my
fingers aren't tracking as close or it's
nearness, you know, it picks words based
on, oh, you you're between the E and the
R, but there's a word here, so it picks
the right word. It's picking the wrong
words more often than it used to. And I
think it's
the AI stuff kind of
and and shouldifying it a bit. I guess
&gt;&gt; the same used to work well does not work
as well now. the same problem I'm having
with this speech to calendar notes thing
that I built last week because the AI is
much better serious improved. It tries
to be too clever. So it doesn't
necessarily go to my app, it goes to the
notes app. So that's not what I asked
for. So yeah, there there are more
layers and that's why I think it's very
very important to control where the AI
has access because otherwise it's just
uh
not always brilliant.
Okay, [snorts]
&gt;&gt; we've all seen the AI take over the
house and lock us in and all that kind
of stuff. You know, that
takes over your laptop and
more credits.
&gt;&gt; Just doesn't seem to
do it.
speakers.
Where's the speakers?
It's hallucinating things it didn't
write yet.
See, it's always amazing up until it
isn't, but that's then you work around
it. So, it's it's you know,
&gt;&gt; it's kind of a bendy screwdriver. It's a
screwdriver, a hammer, a
screwdriver/hammer that works, but
sometimes it bends the wrong way and
doesn't do what you want,
but drive it right and it does some
wonderful things.
Maybe it simply doesn't u
know there. Okay, let's see what it says
now because this is a good example of
What the heck?
Okay, so let me import another one.
Okay, once it's done spinning, I will
launch the build and then I will import
a different transcript.
Or is it doing it for me? Because it got
mad at me now. I think it got mad at me.
They are anthropomorphizing the
&gt;&gt; Oh my gosh, it did it.
&gt;&gt; So
add Tom H to people.
You want an affiliation, Tom?
You don't have an Orchid ID. You do you
have an Orchid ID in America? Of course
you do. Maybe
&gt;&gt; I might. I have never I have no idea
what it is. I have published scholarly
articles so it's probably out there.
&gt;&gt; It's you have to ask for it's free
anyone can get one and the the the the
concept behind it is because people have
suddenly realized that academics happen
to move around in less attenur. Uh so
your email the one you know that paper
you wrote as a bright young you know
young student uh is no longer the email
you address you have anymore but you
might have gone on to do greater things
and you might now be working over there.
So the idea is that you know now you
just give someone the orchid and that
that basically is again it's your GUID
uh primarily within academic space but
frankly it go wider I assume it's
probably used through certainly
technical parts of industry and things
whether
&gt;&gt; when you say GUID
GU ID I think flashback for my uh
Georgetown University ID card
that's [laughter]
&gt;&gt; but Um, so it doesn't automatically
assign upon publication.
&gt;&gt; Oh, no, no, no. Um, you have to go get
one. Um, okay. Because there I guess
that because there are X billion people
in the world and there's no point in
minting them for people who don't need
them. Uh, is probably one reason. But,
uh, yeah, you can just go, you can go
now, go to Orchid, sign yourself up, and
then you have something that is
basically yours,
you know, until they run out of numbers
or something. Um,
&gt;&gt; so
when I added uh Peter's orchid search
found use, it added his affiliation. So
we it could have more stuff, but at
least we have that. So now
&gt;&gt; that's about all I have in there. I
don't have a lot of things in my orchid,
but some affiliations.
&gt;&gt; Yeah,
&gt;&gt; I don't think my IBM's there even
anymore. So, this one now is considered
just a um
Yeah. No, you're not in here yet. So,
it's a draft. So, at least if I now
export this
and I'm going to call it um meeting,
right?
And then it'll show up here.
Oh, this is nice.
Did you see that?
So I click on uh Tom HS
it says what he showed in meetings and
on the left to show it will show his
documents.
So it this is the beginning of an
infrastructure of holy moly right
but we got to design we got to design
the holy
&gt;&gt; what what does it actually give you? I
mean it gives you a result. You ask
something, you get a result. But I I
genu the question is genuine in sense.
Apart from a result and the excitement
of getting a result, what actually
what's it moving you towards?
Mark,
this is funny coming from you because
you know the value of that question
better than anyone. Um, in order to have
stuff, you need to have the computer
know what stuff is. So an important part
of that is for the PE computer to know
who said what.
And once you have that, then you can do
a lot of the AI views where, you know,
has Peter Wasilo been particularly
negative in his comments or whatever the
heck you might want. That becomes
possible because he becomes an
identifiable source. It also becomes fun
when we look at this and these aren't
really here. We can do graphs that
aren't just for visual, you know,
excitement. It could actually be
designed. We can specify design of I
want to navigate all of this based on uh
everything that people agreed with Tom
HS because that's important to me. I I
don't know. All I know is that for for
really zero cost we can start playing.
This is a toy.
&gt;&gt; No, I mean the interesting No, it's
right. It's interesting here. So
actually it's nothing to do with what's
on screen. It's all to do with the
metadata behind and the the real genuine
challenge of actually creating the right
amount of metadata because you can
correct all sorts of things. Uh but
normally most of the countable things
aren't that useful and the things that
you actually want to record are quite
difficult to get. So there's a useful
point here that AI may be pulling out
some of those harder to get bits that to
date often were were literally human
labor because you just had to read the
region thing and extract it yourself. So
that that does seem something useful
there.
&gt;&gt; Yeah,
&gt;&gt; because we the
&gt;&gt; Sorry, go ahead.
&gt;&gt; No, no, no, Mark. You
&gt;&gt; were all right. Just to finish the
comment was to say that um Yeah, because
that seems to be the genuine problem
with a lot of the our sort of our idea
of rich systems now is they
they rest on a concept of of sort of
pervasive metadata that just isn't
there. And we've put very little effort
into actually building systems that
allow us to actually uh effectively
collect the the metadata we want in
order to do the things we want. So you
know this this is I I think interesting
in that regard because if it gets us
something so the fact that you can press
on a name and get something uh is less
interesting to me than fact okay no but
what I can really do is that the anchor
the sort of the pretty bit on the screen
it's more the fact that that the anchor
that is now the ID Tom HS and the system
will allow me to go and find all his
stuff to stick into some uh query I want
to do. So that is, you know, that's good
that that's
useful.
&gt;&gt; So
thank you.
One thing with this really cool thing of
having a test account is that if I now
turn on a test account, you see this
document, this super simple thing that I
published changes,
right? If it's mine, I can supersede it,
follow it up, use it or retract it, blah
blah blah. Right? If I make it a test
account, it changes to
having different ways to um to reply to
it
that didn't update.
Um
so
it it it I really I remember the first
time I saw a Macintosh. I'm sure you all
do as well. And the potential and the
emotion was much bigger than the
capability. Right?
There was this 9 in glowing screen of
knowledge, a keyboard and a mouse
extremely limited.
I'm really thinking now of if you do
escape so it it becomes full screen
reading, right? Very very simple. I
really Yeah, thank you Tom. I I really
can imagine that something like this
would be for Mark to write a statement
that is important to him to share with
us like you know if we go here to uh
that should yeah Eric so he has written
really lovely things
I mean look at this that is not a short
email
and he's written um hi all
of this
I could imagine this would be I think be
better suited,
you know, really
do whatever the heck he wants with this.
Write it simply. We can make it a a more
fullfeatured word processor thing. Of
course, we can.
&gt;&gt; So, what would you pull out? I mean,
that's a good example you give. So, what
would you pull out? what you what what
sort of essentially classification are
you looking to make in that email?
&gt;&gt; Yeah, thank you [clears throat] for um
so Eric, why don't you tell us what the
point was of you sending this?
&gt;&gt; Okay, so I had sent a previous email and
then the next day I'm wondering am I
communicating too much or so like I
wanted to clarify my previous
intentions. I didn't want to appear that
um trying to yeah push my point and then
I just I know that there was an interest
in local first technology. So, I just
posted a few resources and I suggested
these seven ideals as a way of um
evaluating um whatever we build or or
whatever we're looking at like what kind
of apps out there have these seven
characteristics.
&gt;&gt; It's not my ideals. They're they are the
local first ideals in the ink and switch
paper.
What what I'm thinking about is probably
and Mark I'm particularly grateful you
asked that question because an email
with several things is probably not good
to replicate
but to have one thing where Eric writes
one thing even if it's a list
then it becomes a useful thing to go
back
that annotation
&gt;&gt; because one of the challenges I think is
again the in the you're absolutely right
in the idealized notion that but it goes
back to the thing we spend an awful lot
of times talking I must have I must have
something at any moment at any moment
can capture this amazing thought I have
turns out we often don't have many
amazing thoughts but we are totally
encumbered by systems that are
constantly monitoring in case we have
one and and and do you know at the
moment of doing it what it is? So
someone else on reflection said that's
really interesting uh but it may not be
necessarily interesting to everyone. It
might be interesting to to only you or a
couple of people and there and there's a
genuine challenge in it. So I don't see
that as some kind of a repost or a a
degration of what we're discussing, but
there's a really genuine
informationational challenge in this
because what we the real answer to what
we want is a lot more nuance than we're
able to get and we tend to oversimplify
the the codification of it.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; Um and assume and assume it breaks down
into nice things like drop-own menus and
you know you have three choices in front
of you, you know. Well, no,
[clears throat] we don't most of the
time.
&gt;&gt; So,
that is exactly the questions I think we
should be asking.
&gt;&gt; You know, I I have the ability now to do
those drop-own menus, but we as a
community must decide if we should have
those drop-own menus. And I know, of
course, you mean that as a illusion to
all interactions.
Um because I think you're par I'm
paraphrasing you Mark. Some of our
knowledge is worthwhile. We want to
present it nicely. For many of us that
means trying to get into a journal or
conference. Uh others are medium and
some of them are just stupid little
things we write down. You may not want
to publish them those things. But let's
say for the sake of argument you guys
had this now and you wanted to give me
ideas for views.
These are all addressable
and the authors are all known. So it can
be that if we build the right kind of uh
viewing environments
I'm going to publish this pretend it's
me
then we should be able to just easily
point to them because so very often
please tell me if you have had the same
experience you work on a project all
kinds of organization at the beginning
these are principles these are goals
these are this that and the other gets
filed away on a G drive or Google drive
or website or whatever and it's dead.
Can we do this so that we can refer to
again and again these seven ideals or
supersede them because we decided
something is better and have the system
know that
I keep coming back to zigzag. what can
it do to organize the mess and structure
so we could just filter out and
everything except the dimensions we're
interested in at the moment.
And I also posted a uh link in chat if
you want to see another example of short
voice notes. You can bring that up if
you want. By the way, um you see this
line connection here
and this is parallel document Ted Nelson
style. I forgot that it suggested we
build it
and this is the first time I've seen it.
Right. There's look it even moves
and you know like Mark and me we've been
working with brilliant people Adam
Warren Fabian Benitu and um they can do
this kind of stuff they can do it in 3D
but they are humans that it takes time
effort and patience for them to do it
and they should do it in a better way
but we can play around now. Uh what
would be really cool is to see if you
can extend that to do um different scope
link because what what one of the
weakness I I remember playing I actually
used I actually used the uh a Zanadoo
simulation the night before my first
conference paper to hypertext in 2017
sat up in the hotel and had the most
horrendous experience because what I
realized with Zenadu is you couldn't
make a typo. If you made a typo you had
to start with a complete new document.
So, and I know the tech of then isn't
the tech now, but the the this concept
that this old-fashioned notion that it
started from that everything starts from
something else is actually way too
rigorous for the way that we actually
interconnect things. Um, so in
[clears throat] that nice thing you
showed there be interesting to say yeah
let's do that maybe to the whole of that
section of something or maybe to the
whole of the post and and just see if
that that can be done because otherwise
we're stuck with a past notion and as s
we drag these things along with us
because they seem to be they seem to be
pertinent but in fact what they are as
you know they're just to token totems
tokens of yesterday uh dragged forward
and we're not reinterpreting and saying
are they actually useful anymore. or or
can we build a better representation of
that now with the tools we have?
&gt;&gt; Okay, this is really important. Thank
you. So a link can be this. It should
also be able to be this, right? It
should be.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, that's that. Yeah, I had not
really thought of that, but
&gt;&gt; well also there was a thing that was an
enor links. People talked this is where
you have a link that may have some
points.
&gt;&gt; So with Doug links there was addressing
and jumping of course, right?
addressing can be done at different
scales.
The view should also be at different
scale. Read what it's saying here. By
the way, I'll um so I'll copy this into
our chats
because this is just uh I think kind of
mad.
So yeah, connecting stuff is um I
remember the very first time I met Vince
surf and we were talking about
connections and stuff and he used the
term bound.
He said that cuz we were in a restaurant
now him and I are bound by that
restaurant.
Right? So there are all these different
intellectual and physical and
mathematical and other ways of
discernment. You the human brain is good
at discernment, right?
And so if we can I mean we're working
here within current whatever Mac OS
interfaces allow us to do. We can still
do a lot.
What's really interesting there Fred is
is if you think about that so you human
mind very happily is quite could take
that just notion of a space um when you
try and then put that into your nice
coded system it all gets rather
complicated and you have to know where
the box is and what's in or what's out
and things um we're quite happy that
yeah we're inside the restaurant we
don't even know maybe how big the
restaurant is but we know we're in as
opposed to out um and that seems to map
much more neatly um to something like XR
our space. I mean, I I think where we
got slight derailed in our past look
there was we got hung up on text and
what you could see rather than the text
that you could see rather than the
objects you could see because it once
you know what an object is the fact is
whether it has a label or you can read
it or you just know what it is sort of
becomes moot because you what you're
trying to do is you're trying to
understand the relationship. Is this
within this bag or is it elsewhere? It
doesn't matter if you can read the nth
degree of detail because you know it's
there because you happen to know
installed in the system because because
it has that information can display
itself in the way that you've asked it
to. So um it does seem that that's one
way in which the um a sort of a more a
less 2D space can actually be uh quite
useful for informationational things
because I think it's much easier to have
a much more to have basically have more
fluid bounds than are difficult on
essentially the flat screen which in
some way takes us back to the paper page
or the stone tablet.
&gt;&gt; So that flat surface. So I think what
would be very cool is if what you said
now Mark when you get a transcript of
this conversation in this system because
you said something of value you should
be able to select it copy to site make a
new document give it a heading if you
want save that and that is a also of
course you can edit the heck out of it
who cares right that will then be
connected to when you set it here but it
will be as a published document not a
web page that someone forgot to link to
um I think BLA misunderstood what you
said about different scope links but
it's doing it now to show just the words
in the document which is one scope
&gt;&gt; but at least it's possible to to work
with these things
&gt;&gt; because I think we have a chicken egg
problem too with this scoping in the
because we don't have the tools that
allow us to do variable scope linking we
never quite get to experience the
problem so in other words we we
We do because you jokingly earlier said
about the pop-up buttons and stuff,
right? This is the magic of modern
traditional computers.
Why not just have a context menu? You
click on that link. You have an option
show, you know, link to the whole darn
thing. Show me the sentence. The I don't
think it's too much to ask a knowledge
worker to get used to command clicking
on things or control clicking. I mean,
and have options to do stuff like
they're learning it more and more. So,
we don't have the tools, but we can
pretend we do, see how it works,
&gt;&gt; and and then see how it works again.
&gt;&gt; Because I mean, it's really interesting.
You take you take most academic papers.
How many of them, unless it's probably
deep in the humanities, are more than a
citation to the whole work?
Very, very few.
Which is an interesting thing to ponder
on.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Now whether that's lazy authors or
because you know truth is probably most
people haven't read half the things they
site but that's fair because often you
because citing does two things as well.
Citing is often a sort of provenence
chain say no no the thing that I'm
talking about is this thing which is a
known thing to exist you're not you're
not saying any more about it as opposed
to if you were saying no no on chapter
page you know chapter 4 page X it
actually says this or you know the whole
of the chapter as opposed to maybe um a
sentence. So there there are some quite
different dynamics going on there. And
you're right about yes, you could have
this as a as a pop-up link, but I'm what
what I'm really saying is that you must
want a freer experience from that. I
don't think we know really what the
graduations are and the relevant
relevant importance of them. Um because
it's actually quite hard to experiment
with them. Uh and the difficulty is when
we experiment with them, what we do is
we build we make a system that we don't
understand. So now you're trying to do a
job you don't understand using a tool
you don't understand and that's a you
know and that's nobody again nobody's
fault but it's you know this was going
back to think about you know saying have
federated systems and doing on boarding
federated systems bloody good idea
trying to teach someone how to use one
really really hard um and there is no
sort of way there there I don't know if
there's an easy way to do that but
certainly um
doing something to surface and encourage
uh experimentation with different scope
of of linking and indeed things like you
know one to end links. You might have a
link that says, "Okay, this is about X
and X actually ends up pointing to five
things about it, five papers for five
books, whatever, five people um that are
essentially what that represents to you
that that's a really nice thing because
even if that's hard to do on our
faximile of a paper page, i.e. your
screen now um the sort of our software
systems can do that. I mean, you know,
JSON or something under the hood and it
can it can roar away and get all that
stuff and then possibly bring it back in
a sort of visual presentation of a form
that we can we can understand. So rather
than trying to read a whole wall of
text, it might show these as you know
different icons or different
presentations because what what we want
what we're trying to get understanding
and often uh some kind of a proxy for
the thing you're looking at is much more
useful than literally reading the text.
It's something that academics and
engineers and people learn to do. It's
hard work. It's not fun and it's great
if you're good at it and it's miserable
for everybody else. Um but because
you're doing that just to get to the
point of saying oh yes that is this
&gt;&gt; that's the thing I remembered whereas
often you know some lit lit a proxy is
probably the best word for it some shape
some color some representation some
presentation will get you there far
faster with the same accuracy
&gt;&gt; and we're way over time and I greatly
appreciate all of you today. Um, will
you consider
sending me,
you know what I'm going to do? I'm going
to, if you send me a
proposal for a view or any thought on
this that you would have liked to have
written in the system, I'm going to get
Claude to make this a multi- account
system, not just within me and a test.
So, whoever sends me something, I'll
paste it in as and put it in there as
though you authored it in the system.
I'm going to delete everything we have
now cuz it's just rubbish. Um, so if you
send me one or 10 messages by by Monday,
it could be fun and and we could do
things. By the way, the VR project is
going very well, but we will talk about
that at some some other points. Um, do
you think it's likely you will send me
something
I mean, I hope you've seen that it is
not a technical thing. I know you're all
technical people, but it can be like um
in the movie so and so, the little boy
did that, right? It it can be that
simple. Or it can be I really need these
data points in plotted in such a way.
Whatever it is, I I'm very happy to
spend the credits on this. I I found out
you can actually buy more credits. I've
been spending a couple hundred pounds.
best money I've ever spent because you
don't have to wait necessarily for the
next month when you're busy. So, just
show it in there, people.
It's it's a it's an exciting new
chapter. And uh Mark, you may not have
heard the songs from the previous
meetings. The last ones have been quite
good. I look forward to what today's
song will be about.
&gt;&gt; What What do you guys want to have in
the song for this meeting? What's the
summary of today's call for you?
starting with Mojits and going around.
&gt;&gt; Ah, today has been a learning experience
for me. Uh, I did like the the whole
concept behind uh your experiment, you
know, flattening the medium of
communication, you know, sort of and
into a medium of creation and that
creation also not singular but multiple
authors federated uh owning that piece
of information. I did uh really like
that and look forward to you know where
this experiment goes.
&gt;&gt; Wonderful. Eric, since you started it,
what do you think?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, I see a back to the future
theme happening here where we all have
knowledge of the past that we're trying
to bring forward. And it's quite amazing
like when I saw the spline that it drew
and uh how easily it did that. Yeah,
that's an eyeopener that there's a lot
of possibility that we can access right
now.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I I agree with you. Great to hear,
Mr. Anderson.
&gt;&gt; I was thinking something fun and ambient
would be to use the metaphor Gregorian
chant.
&gt;&gt; Go on.
&gt;&gt; No, I I I actually use it a lot when I'm
working. It's it's nice and reflective
uh uh and doesn't have an intrusive
beat. Um I have no idea what it would
really work. Um but it's it's just a
simple rising form melody. Um and it's
contemplative. Um so whether that would
a enable you to do something I mean I I
do find it interesting. I know I've said
to you I mean I did to be honest it
doesn't seem to work for me. That
doesn't mean it's it's wrong. When I say
it doesn't work for me just I don't know
it doesn't sort of somehow gem. So I
don't learn from it, but that absolutely
doesn't mean the reverse. So I think
it's a really interesting idea. Um I
suppose of course if you're going to go
the whole way, you do it as contemporary
dance, but I don't know if Claude is
that able yet to do all the actors, but
that that's a normal that's that's where
this always logically ends. X in the
form of contemporary dance.
So
I know you were partly humorous but uh
to fill the rest of you in a lot of the
XR work when we're doing this loan work
actually turned into that because if you
do gestures if you look at someone from
Exactly Tom you know you do just doing
this here and having to do that it
becomes movement and because you walk in
the knowledge base it it yes exactly
Peter Demetrius it it it does become
it it does become dance and I'm very
grateful for that. So, Peter Demetrius,
your comments for the song.
&gt;&gt; I would say if you're going to go Enigma
has got kind of that Gorian chant music
kind of beat to it. That might be a nice
backgroundy thing that would the voices
could float over nicely. But I'm today
I'm very excited to see you excited over
doing this. This is fun to see.
&gt;&gt; Me, too. I mean, you're you're going to
get ground down maybe eventually by oh,
it doesn't quite and it's, you know, the
edges, but burp by the edges, but uh
enjoy the ride while you're still riding
high on it because it is amazing.
[laughter]
&gt;&gt; The um Thank you. very kind words. The
people
&gt;&gt; cynical by us.
&gt;&gt; The cynical has already happened in my
family. They have to listen to this all
the time and they are getting a bit
annoyed at the world changing
opportunity here. Just Yeah,
&gt;&gt; we need dinner. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Um Tom and then Peter was please.
&gt;&gt; I I don't necessarily have a clear I
mean sometimes it if it's a good
discussion it takes me a week to sort of
digest it and something may come to me
this afternoon but um if it's a
superficial discussion then I understand
it immediately which is is is high
praise for this group. [laughter]
Um I would say uh that uh you know I
guess if I were to phrase it in one term
would be uh if you if they come you can
build it.
&gt;&gt; That's actually nice
as
&gt;&gt; I'm just typing something for you.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. I mean the thing is when it
comes to the XR work we talked about my
notion for the marketing is really
really simple. Get to the point where
you can do a video of someone doing
something much cooler than minority
report and the user has no the viewer
has no clue what is happening but they
can see this person is really getting
stuff done really interacting with their
knowledge then maybe they will actually
want to learn it. So for something like
this, if we can actually use it, it's
that over the shoulder someone else
saying, "Excuse me, that's not
intuitive, but what is it? Can I learn
it?"
&gt;&gt; Uh,
sorry, please.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, let me say one more quick thing
there. Um, I think that uh one thing we
need to do is we need to be thinking
about that XR environment in the same
way that you're thinking about the
software.
um the the the environment I and I think
XR is so much more personal
than uh a two-dimensional environment.
And so if you could build a system that
allows people to decorate their own
rooms, so to speak, uh that would be
very powerful. And right now, one of my
biggest problems with XR is it's
incredibly complex to decorate your own
room. You kind of have to go off what
other people have already built for you.
And um I think we're heading in that
direction. I'm not sure how far away
that is at this point, but that's an
interesting thought I want you to sit
with, I guess.
&gt;&gt; Um Peter Wasilo. And then I'm going to
share something with you guys before we
all fall asleep.
&gt;&gt; Okay. For the song, maybe something with
more of a vibe for the background music.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
Hang on. Let me see what I'm writing.
I know I just asked it a question, but I
I added this based on uh just because we
can, right? So, I have a new thing. Are
you all looking? Uh, as you can see in
the chat, I explicitly said it doesn't
have to be useful, but it should be
impressive.
Oh. Ah. First time we've had a crash.
&gt;&gt; You remember there was that website you
used to be able to go to? It was
Wikipedia and it had a sort of ambient
sound and every time a document was
edited or edit, you get little blinks
and I think depending on what what
category they were in, they it would
appear. It was one of those things that
was wonderful and completely pointless
all at the same time.
&gt;&gt; How cool is this,
right? I'm not saying it's useful, but
it it shows the connection. We've seen
millions of these in graphics magazines,
right?
&gt;&gt; One prompt and the prompt wasn't even I
want blue and dots in a circle and it
should spin. I didn't even say that.
But isn't that the thing that it's funny
that one of the things it actually does
in a way unsurprisingly really well when
you consider what it's read, which is a
lot of bad as well as good, is that it's
actually pretty good at producing not
really sucky um visuals, which is
actually a great thing for humanity
because otherwise consider what the
opposite will be. [laughter]
&gt;&gt; Everyone's doing PowerPoint
90s PowerPoints.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, you know, 3D pie charts, that's
what we need. Because one one thing we
can probably do here is have it export
the map view to author. So it should be
really really simple to do your work in
here and then you put on the headset and
you have all these things. That's the
point of having entirely open
self-contained units of self-describing
knowledge, right?
And it's 1948 in Norway. And I love you
all. And I look forward to emails of
things. They're going to sound really
stupid. I'll have to think about it and
I'll try to do it.
Oh, also I cannot promise that I can do
next Monday. Um, hang on, let me just
look at my calendar. There's a travel
issue. Can you guys do Tuesday maybe?
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; Okay. I'm going to move next week to to
um Tuesday.
Is that okay with you guys?
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Fantastic. I'll send it a general email
when this uh has been recorded for today
and uh
&gt;&gt; I'll give apologies in advance if I'm
not here because I'm just unfortunately
rather loaded this this month.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Nope. I completely understand
that. Um anyway, again, thank you. You
are a tough group to sell ideas to,
which is exactly what's needed. So, um
let's let's talk in a week and send
emails with ideas. Bye. [laughter]
Thank you.
