Kind: captions
Language: en
Hi bro, how are you?
&gt;&gt; Hello. Um, just checking
decided to Hang on. Airpods. AirPod.
Good. Yeah,
I am good. How are you?
&gt;&gt; Uh, I'm good.
&gt;&gt; I'm guessing you have a virtual
background there.
&gt;&gt; Uh, yeah. This is a place you went in
Shinaga. Uh, a museum.
That is very cool.
Very cool indeed. It got a bit uh noisy
in the background. Can you hear anything
noise wise?
&gt;&gt; Yeah, there's slight noise uh like you
know the white noise,
right?
&gt;&gt; Right. Let's Yeah, let's hope it won't
be too bad. Hello, Peter. How are you?
&gt;&gt; Hey guys, it's hot. We're at 36 degrees
C here. Oh wow. Where is hair again? Can
you remind me?
&gt;&gt; In North Carolina.
&gt;&gt; Oh yeah, that can get very hot.
&gt;&gt; It can get very hot. So we're just uh
running air conditioners and there's a
drought going on and not enough water.
All the all the plagues are happening.
&gt;&gt; All the plagues.
&gt;&gt; The you got the you got the Roman cage
matches happening and the all that kind
of stuff.
&gt;&gt; Gladiators.
&gt;&gt; Hello from Brunch. How are you doing?
&gt;&gt; Hello, Peter. We're just talking about
all the horsemen of the apocalypse and
all the plagues of the weather. Uh Peter
Demetrius was saying um yeah, sorry,
Peter, what were you saying?
&gt;&gt; Oh, just we got the the it just piles on
top of each other with the the cage the
the the Gladiator Championships last
night and the weather
being too hot and too dry.
El Nino apparently is going to keep that
up for the season. So
&gt;&gt; yeah, it's getting uh getting
unpleasant, that's for sure.
&gt;&gt; Well, you're going to have
&gt;&gt; people have been people have been
complaining about the weather for the
last 60 years.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, the thermal client stuff,
the the Atlantic current that's keeps,
you know, Great Britain kind of nice is
supposedly starting to the
things are changing there that they
didn't expect to happen so fast. And
that might have some big things for
Europe and Britain.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, that is very very scary. We've
already seen some uh indications
of what it can be
um that it's already started happening
and yeah, then we will be as cold as
Canada.
&gt;&gt; Not good. Canadians love that. I mean,
&gt;&gt; well, yeah, that it will not there's
anything wrong with that, you know, in
Toronto.
Yeah, it it will um climate change is u
is quite scary, that's for sure. We've
had the hottest um May here and going to
come up and down and little is done
about it. But uh at least a lot of the
world has woken up to the perils of
relying only on oil lately. So hopefully
that'll have a positive change outcome.
&gt;&gt; You got you got to look for you know the
silver linings in all this. You know a
shock like just happened. I was like,
"Okay, capricious oil supplies, even
more capricious now."
&gt;&gt; Yeah. The
&gt;&gt; crazy thing is here in New York, I'm not
far from Indian Point, which was a
nuclear power plant. My father had
worked at it during his nuclear during
his career as an electrician with the
IBW. And it had incredible great safety
record. It was producing 25% of the
power for our region. And the
politicians shut it down. So now to
replace it, we are burning coal and coal
plants in order to make up for our clean
nuclear plant because the politicians
were afraid of the radiation. Oh, the
radiation. It's going to make us all,
you know, grow a tail and have extra
fingers and h it's just so frustrating.
&gt;&gt; I got I got so many fingers now.
&gt;&gt; I have a tail
and cleaner. Yeah, Peter, it's an
interesting point that you say that
because first of all, let me make it
very clear. I fully agree with you. Um,
but also the way that that dialogue has
been handled.
Uh, what's the name of the guy? James
Lovelock, the kind of modern um Gaia
hypothesis, he was staunchly against No,
he was for nuclear, wasn't he?
There was I think he may have switched,
but anyway, that that's not really the
point. The point is there are many
reasons to be concerned about nuclear
power but when you look at the
alternatives and what they bring us it's
not such a bad thing when done well at
all. So I agree with you Peter but you
know outside of the discussion itself
how it was handled
um really goes into the kind of stuff
we're talking about how to have
&gt;&gt; it was just on an emotional level there
wasn't any actual scientific analysis of
what they were doing just pure raw
emotion
&gt;&gt; I I think yeah I'm not sure if it was
completely black and white like that but
yeah there was a lot of um uh different
perspectives that's for sure and it
turned out not to be brilliant
&gt;&gt; oh so what did I miss next week uh
missed last week. My car is now in the
shop waiting on the repairs.
&gt;&gt; You haven't heard the song of last week,
Peter?
&gt;&gt; Tom will sing it for you.
&gt;&gt; Tom Tom will sing it for you to bring
you up. No, it was really cool actually.
Um, it was in a good way the opposite of
what we normally have. Uh, normally we
have very factual kind of data
discussions.
And the topic this month is figure and
ground. Of course, just meaning
foreground and background. And initially
when I thought about this was a very
practical thing of um you're in a VR AR
space and potentially all the
information in the world is available to
you. How do you deal with what should be
foregrounded to work on and what what
should be in the background and what
does that mean? and Moheit very very
nicely pulled it into art territory
which is of course where the term figure
and ground comes from at least to my
experience. So we went very much into
that.
Moit do you want to maybe summarize a
little bit from um last week the way
that you saw it to kick off today? Uh uh
so we uh we discussed uh you know when
uh we were discussing historic events uh
so what happens when you are in uh a
place and how do you want to uh
understand that place given that uh
history uh is not really uh u is not
always uh just from a singular uh point
of view. So how do you bring in multiple
points of view uh at uh the moment of
interaction? How do you uh able to
assemble all uh you know these different
viewpoints and how would a person who is
interacting uh with those uh historic uh
elements you know be a museum or a
historic place would want to uh know
about those things. Would it be
chronological? Uh would it be uh
a lot of things uh at once or would it
be uh that you know that you pursued one
point of view and then other points of
views uh opens up and then you pursue
those then you instead of being uh you
know bombarded with uh uh different uh
all the various uh points of views at
once.
Yes. Um yeah. Yeah. It's the the thing
is um now that uh my own system is more
usable and I still have a lot to do
before the release next month.
Handling what can easily be too much
becomes really difficult. And when you
look at it from the perspective that
Mahit is talking about, um, you kind of
want even more,
you know, you you want to not show a
thing, but you want to allow the viewer
or interacctor, so to speak, to um,
access more aspects of it, right?
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Instead of being limited. Yeah.
I do have a few slides today just to
kick off a little bit.
Uh let me just pull them up and these
are this designed for you to interrupt
me at any point. A little bit of
figureing ground and naming. This is
very similar to last week. So the
discussion we've had on and off. I think
we need to continue having is what is a
thing in space and and what is the
space? Is it a thinking space? Right. A
key aspect as I think we all agree to
really learn and generate ideas you have
to interact with them with your brain
and what is in the space.
Um and then obviously we are the future
of text lab. But
what can be conveyed outside or beyond
the text?
Uh that's really kind of where we left
it a little bit last week because
we shouldn't limit oursel to only
words in space. But the question becomes
once we have other things, how much can
they really say? You know, colors can
indicate or other things, but there
aren't that many colors we can separate.
Um pictures take a very specific
way to create. I mean there's no such
thing as a font for pictures for
uniformity although of course we have
styles
but that's a different thing.
So, what what kind of aspects do you
guys want to talk about today?
What what's been on your mind, Peter,
particularly since you haven't been here
since you've had to do other things?
Actually, both Peters haven't been here
for a bit. So, what did the Peters want?
&gt;&gt; Oh, I just dropped a dissertation on the
traditional Japanese house that I think
you might find interesting.
that sort of surface to my radar and the
spatiality discussions and how it fits
in with the environment and climate. So,
it might be of some interest to the
group. So, I shared that in the meeting.
Chat,
&gt;&gt; thank you. I have um downloaded it and
opened it. Uh Tom, the book that you
showed last week has arrived. Do you
have it at hand to show? I think Peter
would appreciate it because it's very
related to what he just said.
&gt;&gt; Are you talking about uh the uh Stuart
Brand book? No, the designing media
mediums thing. The very colorful one.
&gt;&gt; Oh, actually that was Oh, that
&gt;&gt; that the coloring one.
&gt;&gt; That was That was Mojit, wasn't it?
&gt;&gt; Oh, I actually ordered
&gt;&gt; That's right. That's right. For some
reason, I thought it was Tom. Sorry
about that, both of you.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I actually ordered it, too, and
I've got it now, too,
&gt;&gt; but I haven't read it yet.
So, you made a few sales there.
&gt;&gt; I share so many books, it's hard to keep
track of, and this isn't the only place
that I end up sharing books. It's hard
to keep track of which one was which and
where and how.
I'm just looking at this um link here by
Peter Demetrius.
So what what kind of um conference is
this?
It It looks It looks interesting. Oh. Uh
are you talking? You're muted.
Sorry, I was talking on mute. Okay.
Yeah. Anyways, I I got friends who deal
with that word, Greg Panis and whatnot.
They do 3D animation, 3D worlds. It's
all about, you know, the 3Dness of it.
There wasn't about how you going to work
in it or anything. Although, you know,
Second Life and that kind of thing was
kind of a, you know, and Big Experiment
that didn't quite pan out as well as
they'd like. But all the work for worlds
are dying. I mean, they're all like no
revenue stream. I mean, Xbox is selling
off their little thing. I mean, you
know, people are are, you know, the
whole community is kind of like, oh,
we're like it's it's the um like the AI
winter. This is the XR winter. But on
the other hand, you got the glasses
coming in and the new technology. You're
playing with the headset and seeing how
great it is, right? Apple,
&gt;&gt; you know, where that becomes cost
effective, whether they can figure out a
way to make that work for mere humans as
opposed to specialty, you know, I'm I'm
working on jet engines or I'm doing
something like VR is actually medical
stuff or whatever. There's all these
niches that are really good, but it's,
you know, a point tool. It isn't
something you're going to be like Second
Life is supposed to become the next, you
know, meta world. You're in the, you
know, you're living in the Matrix kind
of a thing. Well, I think that the
killer app for Second Life and Virtual
Worlds would have been VR to RL fashion
because there are only so many virtual
tuxedos you can own. But if you could
have your wonderful outfit in Second
Life and order it and have the thing
arrive for you to wear for real 3 days
later, I think they can make a lot of
money that way.
&gt;&gt; Well, they're they're absent to that
now. They're point again. They're point
things. you go to got to go to their
site and they do the 3D show you you
know the thing you can project it on
yourself or you can see the furniture in
the room all those things are happening
by individual vendors that have you know
their
it's a huge investment and and and time
and money but it is a it's it's hip
enough to get people to spend their
money you know if they got disposable
income
&gt;&gt; not to be too on topic but I really
think it has a lot to do with figuring
around as keywords because I I don't
take my uh vision pro with me. I I don't
see the need of Oh, here's my wonderful
wife with Thank you. Um she probably
thought I was sitting sideways today,
which I usually do. Um
yeah, one of the in the barriers with
the actual headset for me, so I have the
new Vision Pro, the M5, really good
performance obviously, but there's a
couple of things. First of all, taking
it with me. The social thing of people
wondering, you know, what the heck I'm
doing doesn't really matter. No one
cares anymore. So, it's not that. It's a
little bit of weight cuz I bring my
laptop also. But a bizarre thing is um
cuz Apple is very good with security.
When I put it on, it scans my iris for
security.
And what immediately I take it off and
put it back on again, it's a login
instead of doing the the numbers, right?
I do the numbers the first time after a
restart.
It is actually a barrier to bothering.
So when I'm writing up things on my Mac
about issues in the headset and stuff to
put it on, have to wait. Oh, there's the
spinner. It spins around only two or
three seconds. But it's a I have to
wait, be interrupted, and then move on.
&gt;&gt; The friction.
Yeah, there there are these bizarre
frictions that, you know, never even
thought about, but once being in the
space, I I really hope that we won't
have too much entertainment that you
really want to be there all day. That
would be pretty sad, you know, real
world and all of that stuff.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; But to actually work in there, working
within the proprietary Apple world, at
least I can bring my users data
automatically. That's a huge benefit.
But that's when we really get to the
topic of this month, which is okay,
everything, every single digital thing
you have and that's available by AI and
that's available through the web is
available,
but your eyes have limited opportunity
to see stuff. How do we choose to
foreground and hide? Foreground and
hide. It's too easy to think it's all
there. We walk around. It isn't that
simple.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
And sometimes uh something I've been
working on a lot this week is and this
relates to both my teaching as well as
thinking about how we process
information and that is what's the
journey that brought us there you know
as Vanavar Bush would say the
associative trails uh to those those
products you know and and do we
understand that I mean for instance one
of the things I've kind of
looked at this week is I've gone back
retrospectively and looked at some of
the chat logs that I've had with various
AIs about working through different
problems and seeing how my own thinking
changed u because I'm very interested in
this from the perspective of my students
as well because I'm trying to change
their thinking in terms of the
discipline of their thinking not
convince them that that that up is down
and red is green and so on and so forth.
uh but you know to to get teach them how
to think uh creatively and and problem
solving and things like that and it's a
real struggle but what I've kind of
started to see as an emerging pattern is
that if I look at the chat logs they
have with the AI I can start to see them
struggling through the kinds of by the
kinds of questions that they ask and so
I'm going to actually start requiring
with every assignment that they show
that they submit at their entire AI chat
log along with the assignment. So I can
go back and see the structure of their
thinking. Now I can already do this with
my own thinking you know as I work
through various kinds of problems uh
everything from the software platform I
mean I had a conversation a few weeks
ago about I don't know what to do next
and it gave me you know we we worked
through a number of different
alternative futures and next steps and
and I have a very different outlook on
what I'm supposed you know the on the
focus of things that I'm supposed to be
worried about right now as far as that's
concerned and the same thing goes with
my writing you know I work. I I I use it
to polish my writing and I go back and
forth and so on and so forth. So, the
reason I bring that up is and I know
this is yet another element, but how do
we make associative trails visible? Uh,
up to now, we've only had like notes,
right? So, if you want to really
understand what happened in this
building behind me in 1787,
you can go through Madison's notes.
You're looking through looking through
his associative trails at that point.
you're looking at, you know, his notes
on, but he didn't publish those until
after he died. So, I mean, he didn't
publish them, but he said, "Don't
publish these until after I died." They
weren't published until 1840. Um, so you
got the final product, but you have no
idea how they got there. The arguments,
the the perspectives, the and those
things are often as important as
anything else because compromises that
we make in our thinking dictate what we
ultimately end up producing. uh whether
that's from a writing perspective or
anything basically you're making every
photo is a compromise
uh and um every you know so how do I and
as I'm if I'm trying to teach
photography how did I get to this
photograph you know you can't tell from
looking at it I always like to look at
art and sort of think through can I
figure out what the artist's process was
that was behind that but that's just me
because I'm weird but um it's really
important though if you want to be a
good artist or you want to be a good
writer or you want to be a good thinker
that you understand how creative people
or how people work their way through
these problems and you can see that and
I think we have not had very good tools
for that. I mean historians understand
it. They complain viciferously if
somebody didn't keep a diary or keep
notes or something like that when they
were working on whatever they were
whatever was going on at that time. I
mean, I'm I'm reading about I'm reading
about the founders right now, and
they're like, well, so and so didn't
write anything about this. You know,
Jefferson was notorious about not taking
notes and keeping track of things. And
so there's a lot of gaps in the way we
understand how he thinks as opposed to
Madison who wrote down everything, you
know, and and so uh but that whole thing
is incredibly important for
understanding history, but it's also
important for understanding ourselves
and growing those ideas forward because
if you can get a clear view of
associative past, how somebody who's a
master at it, and I'm not by any stretch
saying I am, but uh you can get a clear
idea of what somebody else is doing,
that makes it much more likely that you
can figure out how to do it for yourself
or adapt it. So, how do we show that?
Yes, Roa,
&gt;&gt; you said so many interesting things. The
first thing is requiring students to
hand in their chat log is really
interesting.
I think that's that's a very very good
idea. Um, and of course then you could
use an LLM to analyze the chat log as
well.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, that too. Yeah, I don't have to
read it all.
&gt;&gt; I just did a um processing the second
half. I just did actually I I'll show
you because it's so relevant to this.
One second.
Um
yeah, that's all kinds of personal
stuff, right? Um so this is the um
author user guide. Uh no surprise there,
but uh that's not the point. I'm trying
to teach you how to use author right
now. Um but this is a um how to get the
best out of author. So it's all based on
I'll skip down a little bit. For
instance, under writing is thinking,
there is a highlighted marked bit to
write is not only put down what you
know, but also generate new ideas and
insights. That's what I'm presenting in
that section. And then we have this the
psychology with a citation
and a the neuroscience
with a citation. Right?
It's been an interesting process to do
and as obviously Tom what I did with
this once I was done going through
Claude which is my main I then gave it
to Chat GPT which never managed to give
me anything. I think he got too big. I
then gave it to Gemini and Gemini say oh
this is great backing things up. It's a
it's this is a guide to writing not just
how to use the software. Right. Um
there is a
the staging of this is here's my
assertion. Here's two different backups.
Assertion two different backups. This is
a feature. This is why I should consider
using it. Um one thing that would be
really good is if I had a better way to
present this. Actually I've been testing
this thing where uh I have an issue
right now. This is beta. So let me
duplicate the document.
just keep it named copy. So here's one
way of doing it. Um you know we have
this function called contract, right? So
I use that and I'll do it here.
So now you have these little um chevrons
or whatever so it becomes easier to read
and then the user would go through and
then click on it and you know there it
is. Their issue is that the stability
with embedded citations is a bit flaky.
Um, so it's really fascinating, Tom.
You're talking about three levels.
You're talking about the direct
conversation with the AI, you're talking
about the record of that, and then
you're talking about the record of that
as looked at by a teacher or other
person.
Um because because I think it's kind of
cool what I'm doing here, but it's only
the beginning of something. I think as
we are better able to put the layers and
it gets more interesting and that's a
different kind of figure on ground,
right?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I I want I would in I'd like to
issue a um provocation. Let's call it
that. Is writing thinking or is writing
the product of thinking? uh or is there
another element of thinking that people
who can't write well is masking
uh and that's uh you know I think as
someone who writes reasonably well I
like to think but always as uh Andy Weir
says you know give a man a book he'll he
amuse himself for an evening teach a man
to write you'll give him self-doubt for
the rest of his life
um but you know it's it's it. You know,
we know that writing is hard and um
harder for some people than others. Um
and it requires constant practice and
the more you do, the better you're at
it. But it's just a form of expressing
thinking. Is it the only one? Is it the
only one? Is it the reason we think of
that is because writing is the best way
we've had, but maybe it's not the last
way we've had. Um,
and
&gt;&gt; it's a fair it's a fair question and um,
obviously in my context because I'm
producing a writing tool uh, I I I don't
at all think that writing is the only
way of thinking. No, not at all.
However, uh, I do think that um,
the
hardening, the freezing, the flattening,
the linearization crystallizes
something. So I put a John Lo quote in
here. Reading furnishes the mind with
materials of knowledge. It is thinking
that makes what we read ours. That's
about rewriting notes and so on.
&gt;&gt; Uh Gal Braith who turns out to be a
Southampton University professor wrote
about generative writing and he doesn't
mean AI generative. He means human
generative.
&gt;&gt; It is when you're in the state of mind
where you write stuff and then you
realize something new or you realize
what you wrote is incorrect.
So it's a bit like any construction. You
know, you may have an idea of a room,
but until you start painting it, you
just don't know. And also in software
development, and this is why I think
it's so important we try to use the
headset more. Until you build the
experience, it's really hard to know the
full extent of it.
So I am really happy to, you know, I'm
not hardcore on text in this community
at this point. really happy to think
further. Uh it's just that we have 5,000
odd years of um
working on the external. Okay. So,
by the way, Tom and I talking a lot.
Please jump in guys just rudely if you
want to. That's um
the space the hippocampus
has a lot to do with how we deal with
space
&gt;&gt; and the fact that we're at a point in
science now where
I don't know if you were the same as
teenagers as I was but I really wanted
to know more about how the brain worked.
I hated the notion of psychology. To me
that was just some person guessing what
goes on, right? It's ridiculous.
But having the opportunity now where
there's been so much work to see which
bit connects with what in what way, it's
absolutely insane.
So the hippoc campus deals with spatial
information but also abstract
information. That really should give us
a towhold into how to use the space.
And if we can think of better ways to
represent knowledge, we should
absolutely do that. But it's really
really difficult to prethink that
right it's like thinking a thought
before you have the medium for it. Now
if you have something that is volutric
you know how do you see that? I guess
you have there has to be movement right
there has to be interaction
&gt;&gt; because if you see a picture of a cloud
you don't know the shape of it.
&gt;&gt; I don't know what what provocations I
mean moit from an art perspective since
you were so brilliant at bringing that
up.
How can how can you see
a different specialization of knowledge?
Not that Tom is necessarily saying
space.
Uh that's that's what I've been thinking
too you know lately for uh my project as
well that uh you know how do we populate
things you know in what form uh
when we are surrounded uh as you in Tom
was saying uh that one can reflect on
one's own thinking
uh and with and for that thinking you
know maybe we have records uh those that
we have ourselves have made. uh but you
know in explorations
uh
how do we u assemble those and uh bring
all of those records uh uh like you know
keep maybe you know keep our chats uh
with uh with AI uh regarding u a subject
you know maybe we can assemble those
things but can we simultaneously
assemble along with those chats also our
reading lists also our uh
uh uh maybe podcasts and uh what happens
when we when we have got such volume of
things and not all in text form uh like
you know maybe uh and how do you retrace
you know one of the things you know it's
it's perfectly doable to retrace
something in inside of an application
where there is a a record like in a
chatbot maybe we can retrace our our
histories in a browser but we probably
can't retrace uh our uh understanding of
things. You know, it's only in
retrospect that you know we can
understand how we understand things you
know that we have had such influences.
We have had the influence of such these
artists uh these neuroscientists these
but during the act of doing during the
act of understanding uh we uh may not be
fully aware of those things but but you
know but but
uh what essentially do we need you know
when we uh uh want to when we are
thinking of augmenting our cognitive
capabilities
like do we really need the record of all
our interactions or do we want uh uh
uh or do we want a new ways you know
through which we can connect those
desperately uh far off things which
earlier we uh you know could not connect
like you know a lot of the things uh
will stay outside of our uh note
takingaking uh application
uh but how can we bring those things
together when we are thinking of
interacting with multi-modal
uh elements what would those interaction
how what would those interactions look
like when when you have text and a video
and some other format
uh right now each of these formats stay
in their separate windows
but cognitively uh we don't we are not
separated uh we will be interacting with
AI we will be thinking of pro maybe a
picture painted by some artists we will
be thinking of something we read and uh
right now we depend just on on ourselves
most of the time to bring those things
from the background uh and into the
platform I guess you know we can't
really uh uh uh predict fully you If we
were to go in the direction of trying to
predict at the right moment the right
things that
a user might want. Uh probably we we we
would fail. you know that would just be
uh uh chasing the goal of uh making the
most accurate recommendation system
based by synthesizing all the
interactions that a person has uh
tracking in in 24/7 in all their
devices. But maybe you know what uh in
instead one of the things that we can do
is make uh uh uh the mediums through
which we interact with things uh more
conducive uh to such uh sort of
cross-pollination
between uh these uh you know various uh
objects of our interactions. So that you
know the the uh the uh the sort of the
cognitive load that uh earlier our uh uh
brains you know dark matter used to do
maybe the medium of cognition can do
medium of interaction can become the
medium of cognition to a certain extent
not not fully not doing
for for us the thing that you know we
each individual would do but be more
conducive so I've been thinking of you
know what what capabilities does the
medium need and in what form uh so that
uh they uh uh the medium can assist us
in these things.
&gt;&gt; I like the idea of using it to connect
things. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Because
&gt;&gt; connect different spaces. I mean, yeah,
I think the days when we can sit around
quietly in a library and that that's the
um
sum total of our absorption of
intellectual information are long over.
And
&gt;&gt; it to me that seems luxurious, you know,
to be able to say, okay, this is my
universe. These books are my universe.
I'm going to explore my universe. It's a
very big universe, but it's still I
control the bounds of it. And now I've
got people throwing information at me
from all directions. Some of it quite
good, some of it lousy, and my filters
are always fully engaged to try to
figure out which is which. Uh, and um,
so but I like your idea of connecting up
because we have different kinds layers
of spaces. We have mental spaces, we
have visual spaces, we have conversation
spaces.
Um
there are different kinds of
conversation spaces. Uh one of the
things again that I that I'm thinking
about with this that that I think that
the chat logs give us is that they give
us the ability to move forward in a
conversation by ourselves
when we need to.
Not saying that this kind of
conversation I mean I get stuff out of
these conversations all the time that I
then turn around and use later on and
think about and they get bundled up with
my ideas and and repurposed and so on
and so forth. Uh and you know those
these are the kind of conversations I
this is this is why I like coming to
this is that to have these kind of
conversations that stretch your brain. I
don't get to have many conversations
that stretch my brain. Not definitely
not with my students and also sadly
enough generally not with my colleagues
because
yeah in any case uh so for various
reasons
&gt;&gt; this chat is recorded
&gt;&gt; I know
&gt;&gt; just in case they
&gt;&gt; well no actually the reality the reality
is is that it's hard for us to get
together you know in some cases I mean
we we have a campus that's right over
627
square miles and and so that's you So
getting everybody in one place at one
time involves a lot of driving.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. No, exactly. It's not so easy just
to go to the teachers lounge.
&gt;&gt; So
&gt;&gt; right,
&gt;&gt; three points on this. First of all, Tom,
I look forward to your next write up
where you are hopefully going to be
writing about submitting the chat
record. That's part of the work
&gt;&gt; that that needs to be recorded. That's
brilliant.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Last night we were listening to a
podcast by John Finemore, who's a
British comedian. Really clever guy.
Have you has any of you heard of him?
&gt;&gt; No.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Look look him up. It is just funny
and very clever and one from many many
years ago way before AI. There was the
device called the autoer.
So you would say oh yeah no where did I
heard that? Oh yeah you read it in so
and so paper. It would tell you. So it
was kind of a a joke device, right? And
in the beginning it was very cool in a
discussion you could say no I read that
as some and then it would as the skit
went on it would be no yeah your mother
told you this and it's right so
auto citing from your past as seen as a
fictional device was kind of fun highly
recommended now of course Siri does a
the new version of Siri does some more
integration of your life so there's a
question of uh thank you Peter for that
link um of integrations but one thing I
wanted to talk a little bit about is
uh yes it is crucial that we have the
data without the data we can't do any of
this and it's really really important
that it isn't just owned so uh what gets
fun is way back the very beginning of
this discourse um Brandle made a magic
carpet of the discussions we've had
where you could see color shifts and
shapes depending on topics and all kinds
of things it was completely useless in
and of itself but it was a very very get
provocation
um to what could be done and it was from
real data. So I I hope we'll get to a
point where we can start doing this
where
we we use the things that us humans can
relate to. Like if it's on a line in 3D
that's useful. It doesn't have to be
always spatial, right? So for instance,
our own conversation here over the last
uh uh 6 months to have every time we've
talked about a certain kind of topic we
can choose is highlighted in a way but
not as a static one thing but as a way
we can say okay you hold on to that and
now you make something else um coming
out.
Oh so what's the Brian Lori sketch? I
have to quickly have a look.
Oh, yes. No, that that's a good one.
Steven Fry has been such a supporter of
this work. It's been uh it's been really
&gt;&gt; He gets it.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, he really does.
&gt;&gt; Um I mean that's the thing, it's funny
that you brought up comedy because I was
actually thinking about that. You know,
that's what a comedian does. A comedian
makes connections that you wouldn't
otherwise see and then does that in the
art of performance. And a writer does
that in the in the art of writing or you
know there's a fine line between a
comedian and a storyteller. Uh
maybe one's a little funnier than
another but they're all storytellers. Um
but uh that's what you're doing. You're
connecting ideas and and the comedian is
a good comedian. you know, the George
Carllins of the world are very good at
stripping away the the the BS, the the
facade above things and look at what's
really going on underneath and making
light of that. And that I think is
incredibly
uh valuable as a way again of shifting
your perspective on things.
&gt;&gt; And that's also why we have the songs
&gt;&gt; as a record.
It it's been fascinating to um shock
people with them actually, especially
older people. It's like they get really
kind of angry that some of it they
cannot tell is not humanmade and and I
put my hand up like I am a human. Of
course, I pressed less buttons than
ordinarily would be done, but I'm still
a human that made it.
&gt;&gt; Sorry. Yes, we do need many ways of
looking at it.
&gt;&gt; So, if I if I can force you guys, we
&gt;&gt; use a virtual space to do that.
Yeah. Yeah. No, exactly. So, um, thank
you Tom. I was going to push on exactly
that point. So, if we look at, let's
assume that we have all the dialogue
around what we talked about, including
all the information that's been shared
to the group available in the space. Uh,
let's assume that we have a lot of other
stuff available that we can put on
timelines or graphs or in boxes or
whatever.
um what would we actually want to do?
And even more important question is why
would we do it? Are we still talking
about building
uh documents to hand in or submit or
we're talking about building knowledge
shapes? What kind of things are we
fantasizing about building here?
you know, from my perspective of some of
the other groups I deal with, you're
trying to collect it and put it on a
wiki. Okay, we we we got a way have a
way to collaborate. You you throw out
this text set of pages and you're doing
a basically building a website. That's
kind of the
&gt;&gt; lowest common denominator now of a
shared information structure. Now, you
can try to move that into 3D and do like
a VR thing, but it's basically the same
kind of thinking about I just need a way
to put this stuff out in
a potentially nonlinear form, but most
of it is kind of linear. You're going to
click on one link and go to the next
link and next link. There's a there's a
flow through it that the way you wrote
the pages at least
come through. Now, if you do a good job
with a federated wiki or different
people authoring things or there's
references between things, you end up
with a nice web of, oh, I can go down
different paths. It's a, you know, like
a book with multiple choice. You know,
you follow different uh conversations
down through the chapters like a almost
like a mad lib or something like that.
But I
&gt;&gt; choose your adventure.
&gt;&gt; Choose your adventure. But I think that
there is the authored thing. I want the
movie script. I want the movie to lead
me through the plot and not have okay
there's five different endings maybe but
there's a lead time because then I don't
have to think so hard and that's
&gt;&gt; but that's a different that's a
different medium I'm really interested
in in the ideas that put the mo that led
to the movie you know what what did the
book say what did the screenplay say
what how did the director choose to
&gt;&gt; realize this on film and that stuff has
always been really fascinating to me I
mean I I I want to, you know, one of the
things I love watching is is stories of
creativity. So, you know, Frank Zappa
talking about the things that influenced
him over time and how he built his music
and the decisions that he made because
they help me out, they help me
understand the decisions that I could
potentially make and maybe I can explore
some things that are in a different way
or maybe I discover some new sources of
stuff that I'm like, "Oh, I didn't even
know this existed." You know, that
happens all the time. Well, your book
from a couple weeks ago.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, the book. But it's amazing. But
that's comes from a conversation we're
having here. This this little thing that
we're doing here,
&gt;&gt; right?
&gt;&gt; We we uncover each other's, you know,
oh, here's my favorite thing that I you
know nothing about that I knew
something, you know, that kind of thing.
But yeah, if you go to like if you go to
like a a Netflix or an Amazon, you can
click on the or the DVDs that had the
extra information like the um you can
click on say tell me more about the
scene. it goes into the actors or goes
into the script or whatever it is.
You've got kind of a some things are
enhanced with, you know, the director's
edition or whatever. Well, a little icon
pops up when you're in the middle of a
scene. you can go to here's the
information about how the scene was made
or the you know here's what the stunt
man had to go through or there's this
hyperwebish thing that kind of happens
but I don't think I haven't seen the
data exactly but some of it was how many
people actually bother to go through all
that extra information that's tagged to
the movie so you can kind of say hey I
want to see about the movie versus
pulling all that out and put it into an
extras feature that is documentary about
the movie or you know here's the the
stuff that actually gets watched more
and it turns out I think doing the work
of doing the embedded clicking and
embedded thing is is is a wonderful way
of tying it all together but the way
people want to experience it is I either
want to watch the movie and get the art
of it or I want to see all the technical
details and it's nice to have that
separate as a separate um dialogue
separate movie basically a movie about
the movie it's in the extras collection
and not integrated into the rest of it.
And I think that's going to keep on
going. People, we're lazy or we we we we
don't want to do the work of digging in
around. We're not uh movie archae or
story archaeologists. And I think that
happens for a lot of different things,
you know, that a textbook, oh, I want
the cliffnotes version, you know, and
then work my way out or the AI summary
version and then click into the real
stuff and maybe I have time to go sit
back and read the full text in all its
glory and kind of get all the, you know,
the wonderful stuff, you know, Dr. Jago
or something like that. But, you know, I
can't say
&gt;&gt; first. The question is why is that, you
know, why why is that? Why do we feel
compelled to take shortcuts? And
&gt;&gt; I don't know if it's shortcuts
&gt;&gt; shortcuts that help, you know, that that
that may hurt us.
&gt;&gt; Well, I I I think we're talking, first
of all, I think uh you two are talking
about exactly the same kind of
entertainment. Uh I think Tom, you you
are happy to watch a prank Zappa uh
linear story about his creativity.
&gt;&gt; So that is the equivalent of watching
something else. But um from the research
I've been doing over the last few
months, one of the things that's really
clear is making a decision takes a lot
of energy,
right? It is really important. My tool
liquid was developed on the point of
Thank you, Tom. We're going to go
through that in a second. Um so it's
what kind of decisions too. So, for
instance, I've noticed when I play
Battlefield in the evening, which I
often do. Am I going to go over the
ridge or blow it up or go around? I can
sit in a room with very little oxygen.
It's not a problem. The these are flow
decisions that are easy cuz I'm in
there, right? To make a decision when
I'm working intellectually, I need a lot
of water, some caffeine, and a lot of
oxygen. It's a very different level of
decision in my brain.
So, I really think what uh you guys are
talking about here is the kind of
decisions to follow a narrative because
if if you're really engaged in a going
down the rabbit hole, these decisions
are very low cognitive effort for you.
Why why did Frank Zappa say that you
know that that that is an in the flow
easy choice but if you are not engaged
at the time in the same level then you
know Frank Zepper has spoken for 3
minutes what do you want next that
becomes a cognitive barrier rather than
an opportunity
and this is really exciting because this
to me is exactly what information
interface design is all about. How do
you make options opportunities rather
than barriers? Right.
So, if we then maybe Oh, yeah. Peter,
you look like you're going to say
something. Please do. And then
&gt;&gt; I'll I'll I'll put myself off mute so I
don't talk in you summarized it very
well about the the the
narrative versus the interactive
dialogue and the energy level. why
people sit back and be passive even when
you're on the phone doing you're you're
just kind of scrolling and you're doing
uh you know Pokemon Go is an interesting
thing is like is that inter oh well
there's some you're moving around a bit
so there was a thing about that being
somehow good but it's still you're
passively looking for other things
you're not creating Pokemon Go way
stations and points and stuff like that
so there's a a creator author an author
viewer an author consumer writer
consumer kind of relationship ship
there.
&gt;&gt; And of course, a lot of it has to do
with interest level.
You know, I I'll never forget when I
along with Peter, I went to Syracuse
University and um a guy who didn't go to
the university, he stayed with the
people I was staying with and he was,
you know, basically a party guy and you
know, didn't care for anything academic.
But then suddenly there was one thing
and he just became a professor overnight
because that was his interest at the
time. So, you know, Tom, when you are
going down the rabbit hole, something
you're curious about, very different
than having been told you have to go
down the rabbit hole.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; It's funny how chased down the rabbit
hole.
&gt;&gt; That's a That's a good That's a very
good sentence. Could imagine that'll be
the song title.
&gt;&gt; I have to keep that one.
So I if just for for fun if if we look
at um Tom's link number two.
So he has all kinds of call outs
headings.
Um let's be super lazy and pretend we
don't really care about what he's
written but we have to read it right
because this is nicely formatted.
How could it be, let me put it this way,
in a headset be presented quote unquote
better?
What would we want to see?
It's funny that you should say that
because one of the problems with
understanding flow theory is that if you
it it has the as I say at the very
beginning here, the Heisenberg problem.
to me. If you stop, if you try to figure
out if somebody's in flow or not, you're
pretty much guaranteed that they won't
be in flow the second you ask the
question. And so that's always been a
major issue for for Chisin Mahal who's
trying to figure out how to how to
analyze it, who to study it. Uh, and
it's been a real will of the wisp. And
that's that's something that uh
how would you do that visually? I mean,
I don't know, but it's it's it's it's
even more invisible than usual because
of the fact of that because it's a real
will of the wisp.
&gt;&gt; So, I'm going to lovingly and
respectfully ignore that.
&gt;&gt; Uh because I think if when someone is
reading this, they shouldn't necessarily
be in flow while they're reading it.
&gt;&gt; Does that make sense?
&gt;&gt; So, yeah.
&gt;&gt; So, so let's say we have a new PE person
to the group. Uh and this is here. I
mean one of the key things I would want
in an ideal environment is uh you write
about 20 years ago I started writing a
book. I want the word I to be defined.
Who the heck is I?
Right. You the author you know like
little things like that should be
immediately findable. Um
but
v visually how would you let's just
fantasize because this is a
what are you saying Peter?
Peter Wasilo, please speak up.
&gt;&gt; Uh, determining what I references.
&gt;&gt; All right.
&gt;&gt; What?
&gt;&gt; Determining what I references.
&gt;&gt; Yes. Yes. Yes. Like a glossery or Yes.
Okay. I I see it. Yes.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Phila is the linguistic term for
leaving out the
&gt;&gt; my favorite my favorite version of that
is from Life of Brian where he goes,
"You're all different." And one guy
goes, "I'm not
indeed.
Indeed." Um,
so I I lost this. Something's happened
to Safari. The tabs are not in the order
I expect. Let me just try to find the
page again.
&gt;&gt; I'm protecting you.
&gt;&gt; Very, very odd. I'm just going to click
on your link again. Any thoughts on how
this should be presented?
Oh, yeah. Peter Demetrius, uh, usability
lab, all of that stuff. No, I'm much
more interested in what you as a person
right now would want. I mean, you've
seen like like the mockups, well, what I
have in in author, you know, you can see
sections in whatever way you want,
&gt;&gt; but that that's really quite literally
primitive.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I'm thinking that I was thinking
about the fact that having been through
a lot of human factor stuff way back
many years ago when it was relatively
hard, you can get clicks and stuff.
You've got eye tracking and stuff and
you put on a headset and you know
exactly where people are spending their
time and whatnot. They I I know for
at least third hand they know some of
the the military systems that present
you know the the the 3D synthesis world
around you where you're in a cockpit but
you're looking around at all the radars
and all that you know the information
systems there amazing
psychology amazing amount of work going
into there and hopefully some of that
peels out into us in the real world as
opposed to being in that specialty
cases.
&gt;&gt; Well, the the tracking
&gt;&gt; million dollar cockpits,
&gt;&gt; the tracking also comes down to privacy,
which is why Apple's headset does it
really well, but me as a developer have
no access to it.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; So, that's a question that goes back to
the data. You know, we often think about
the document type data coming in, but
what about the data about us going out?
You know, where do we want that to be?
because it it could be interesting if we
have a meeting with lightweight headsets
or whatever that it tracks our mood and
all kinds of good stuff for our own
benefit so that over a year or 10 year
or whatever we could see I was really
annoyed here but this is when I made
progress or whatever it might be
&gt;&gt; but there's an invasion of people are
looking at each other's bodies or
&gt;&gt; well my eyes are up well eyes are up
here look here you know there's that
&gt;&gt; considering right now you can only see
about this, you know, it's like
&gt;&gt; I mean women women can have tr you know,
people can have troubles with things. So
there's
&gt;&gt; a lot of things that's going to track
that are legitimately worrisome.
&gt;&gt; But if you go in for a click, like
you're doing gaze click or or the kind
of utilitarian things that you're going
to say, oh, you clicked on the link or
you follow down this ra piece of the
rabbit hole. Um maybe you do um like
video gamers do where oh you just go
along for the ride and you you know they
they YouTube stream their stuff and
they're playing the game at a level you
can't but you can participate in it and
you watch you're on a movie of him
playing a part you know making driving
things. So, as a professor, you're kind
of doing that in class. You're leading
people through the sources you've given
them and whatnot and saying, "Here's my
point of view. Here's a narrative I've
given you for the the duration of the
lecture."
Um, and hopefully, you know, you refine
that over the years and becomes, you
know, almost a stay thing, then maybe a
book, and then maybe, you know, a video
series. And then they try to get rid of
you because why do we need you talking
about it when you're talking about it in
a YouTube video?
materials are available and open, you
know, open curriculum stuff. Um, which
is another issue about
do you give away too much of yourself or
um how do you make a living doing this
when oh I can give this away and all of
a sudden the AIs know everything have
done all the tricks that I know about to
make my presentation smart and
interesting.
Now, when am I needed to
why how do I make my living or how do I
monetize that or how do I make sure that
I'm not uh feel exploited in a bad way?
&gt;&gt; Yeah, that that's that's a concern. Um
that's something we got to sit somewhere
in the food chain whether it's on top or
wherever. And this is why I like Tom H's
notion of um hand in your chat record
when you hand in your work. I think
that's eminently reasonable within an
academic context. But we're looking at,
I'm being really hardcore here. We're
looking at this particular article.
It's got headings. It's got italic text,
bracketed text, links.
What could be our fantasy way to
to experience this?
I mean, should it be rectangles in
space? Should it be something more
floaty? Should it be shapy? Should it be
more arty? Should it be soundy?
&gt;&gt; We going into
&gt;&gt; uh we're going into Tom H one of Tom H.
&gt;&gt; Part two, part one.
&gt;&gt; It doesn't really matter, but uh I'm
looking at part two myself right now.
&gt;&gt; Okay, let me start looking at the same
&gt;&gt; the silent partner.
&gt;&gt; Oh, yeah.
Yeah, Kevin Kelly was a bit of a good
digger.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I could see that the, you know,
the quotes popping off to the side or
something like that. Just looking at in
2D.
It's a long scroll through it. Okay, I'm
I'm scrolling on my phone. I'm scrolling
on my browser right now, not on the
phone. Yeah, this is an unusually long
one because I wanted to show more of the
and the indented paragraphs are all from
the chat. So, I wanted to analyze the
chat and so a lot of the bulk of it is
the chat itself and uh I couldn't I
didn't I didn't think there was I
already had it
&gt;&gt; uh condense some of its own answers
uh but uh I couldn't figure out how to
make it any shorter.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, given the tool, I mean, I'm
not sure this
&gt;&gt; Yeah. uh what you can do in Substack to
make that happen with some HTML trick of
popping off on the right, you know,
whenever you get to it. So,
&gt;&gt; yeah,
&gt;&gt; make it look more like an annotation.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Um and that Yeah, but yeah, with
Substack, I don't think you can do that,
but uh that's certainly what Ted Nelson
would say,
&gt;&gt; you know.
&gt;&gt; Yeah,
&gt;&gt; you have a right length. I mean, it's a
good length besides those big making the
thing longer to scroll through.
&gt;&gt; Yeah,
&gt;&gt; the friction you're talking about here
has really come up in the guide that I
saw you showed you earlier. Um,
Dave Millard really highlighted to me a
few months ago that
there is good and bad friction.
Mhm.
&gt;&gt; You know, it is important that we
support people doing the friction, but
let's try to ignore the contents of this
really good piece and look purely on the
presentation.
The the thing is
to be boringly provocative. It might
just be that the best way to read this
considering
we take the the basic position that
you're standing up, you're not seated,
right? for the sake of our fun
discussion now to really use the space.
Maybe it is one column per section on a
wall. Maybe that's just brilliant.
You know, like Bob Horn who was in our
community, he did wall massive wall-
sized murals. Sorry, my computer went
funny. Uh that may be enough.
&gt;&gt; But you have to then come up with a way
of navigating between columns. But
sorry, go ahead. Yeah, it be it would be
maybe a sphere. You can have multiples,
but you basically have the pages laid
out like you would lay them out on a big
floor, but I think I think it would be a
flat one that you have to go to the
side. It'd be probably something more
circular around you, so you can just
kind of turn and look
so you don't run in. You don't have to
walk into your, you know, the walls of
your library or office to get to it. I
think that would be
&gt;&gt; two different ways. the flat that you
have to walk across like you're walking
across a m mural and looking at or or
poster booths and you're looking at one
next next versus a kind of a rounded
rounder kind of thing where they're all
laid out in some big circle around you.
The thing about that uh is really on the
nose because uh with the Sloan work we
did, it was basically swivel chair and
you were sitting in a either a cylinder
or a spare depending on how you defined
it. And that has many benefits. It can
be used at someone's office. You don't
have to worry about hitting walls. But
one of the detriments is it doesn't
really take advantage of space. You know
if it you can have things a little
further away but if you do have to walk
uh then is the whole hippocampus thing
then the physical space and the
knowledge space becomes intertwined.
So let's say you are used to to take the
most boring one. You have the you have
columns and the one on the left will
always be um chapter one or abstract.
You will just know that when you read
something you go there for that
references are there. So you can start
leveraging that.
I pressed the button by mistake. I was
trying to get the chat window up. Sorry.
Um
the thing is I'm also very often in a
seated position especially when testing
so I also want to do this kind of stuff
but the benefit of getting up you get a
bit more blood flow you get more
specialtity
there are some benefits to that but a
uh problem is
you you the human sharpness is it's only
about this size it's not much Right. The
phobia is tiny of course, but you know,
easy movements are about this size. A4
sheet held sideways,
that's about the best reading.
So everything else when we move around
becomes
ground, becomes background.
Of
&gt;&gt; course, we're trained to do that. You
know that.
&gt;&gt; Well, what do you mean, Tom?
&gt;&gt; I mean, we we grew up reading paper.
Well, I still have some on my desk here.
So, you know, this is this is, you know,
&gt;&gt; I think it just happens to be that
that's a size that fits because if you
&gt;&gt; look around on something like a 14-inch
laptop, which is what I happen to have
now, your your eyes your head doesn't
have to move a lot, right? So, if you
have if you
&gt;&gt; could also be because the laptop is
designed with the paper as a as a uh
implicit thing. And again, it's a
question of why do lawyers use legal
size paper?
&gt;&gt; Uh, Peter, why do you use legal size
paper?
&gt;&gt; Oh, Peter is
&gt;&gt; Well, um, basically it's just tradition.
Um, I don't know how it got started. It
was always what they used. Actually,
nowadays there's less and less use of
legalized paper because law students
just buy whatever legal pad is easier to
find. And generally letter sized pads
are more common than legalized legal
pads. Um part of it also came from court
rules because courts mandated that they
wanted to have the longer sheets of
paper to reduce page count so that the
stacks would be a little bit shorter and
um it just sort of carried over from
that. Actually it'd be very interesting
to have someone go and research the
history of that.
&gt;&gt; But Tom, there there is also the
physicality of eye movement because I
did uh do the research by doing
measurements in dialogue with Claude.
And um so Claude measured the the
phobia, best reading distance, eye
movement, head movement and all that
thing. And it said that our physiology
approximates
a 60 cm away a four sheet of paper
roughly. So I don't know if it's because
we're trained because if anything else
you have to move your head, right? And
that has a cost. I'm not saying it's a
bad thing. We shouldn't sit still all
day at all. And this is of course why
I'm very much advocating, you know,
getting up and moving around. But in
terms of active reading, we can't read
anything off center. We just can't do
that, right? It has to be really close
to center to be readable. So once it
goes off, either we have the motion or
we have something else. Of course,
outside of this vision, we have motion
is much more sensitive.
So that we can build into what what
happens motion-wise. You can see anybody
moving at you know at the corner of your
eyes um really with high acuity. We just
can't get the detail of it.
So this needs to be taken into account.
&gt;&gt; The A4 size or the paper I don't think
it's a matter of us learning it. I think
the paper has learned this is what works
for humanity because you they used to
print broad sheets and all sorts of
weird things on printers and whatnot and
you know uh you know for a big poster
maybe but again like you say you got the
phobia you got the head motions and all
that A4
is is successful as a piece of paper
size because it matches our psychology
of of or it's pleasing and comfortable
&gt;&gt; and so I don't think It's a matter of us
learning it. The paper has learned us.
&gt;&gt; Well, I mean, Tom, uh, one thing that
Fabianne made me do, uh, which was very
useful
two years ago now, he made me, um, take
a magazine or a book, cut it up, and put
it up on a wall. I I did it in XR, so it
was, you know, didn't have to use a wall
and tape and all of that. Um, so, so
that was another, um,
another way of looking into how it
should be presented. But I'm very happy
to try to mock up other ways of looking
at it. One of the things that's nice
with the the Apple headset is when you
choose to look at a panorama, even if
you just create it on the Mac, you can
make it almost wrap around. So, it's
really easy to mock up different kind of
layouts.
I'm very, very happy to do to do more of
those.
One question I have is if you are in
if you're in the VR space and you have
bunches of papers like we you know we've
seen you lay up there in that space are
you really looking at one paper? You're
looking at the whole
universe of papers there that you've got
in the space.
Um and that in and of itself is a visual
cue. So, it's not just the contents of
the page, but it's the the um the
context of the page
&gt;&gt; and all the positions.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Left or right, it's above. It's
Oh, I go three up. That's where the
thing that I was interested. Three down
or four over. If you put them in a big
matrix of pages
&gt;&gt; versus a linear set, you might actually
have better, you know, geo, you know,
and you know, that's where chapters come
in. Maybe one each row is a chapter and
that way you can go from chapter to
chapter easier by just raising your head
and looking up there. Oh, and make your
relationships there. So that might be
&gt;&gt; when I one thing I just discovered about
Substack is if you look on the left side
here, you'll see these little hash
marks. Uh if you click on those, they
will show you the different uh section
breaks and take you straight to them.
They're like anchor anchor links.
&gt;&gt; Oh, nice. They hide the uh the little
lefth hand contents. Nice. Yeah, but the
reason that matters is from the
perspective of what we're talking about,
having a navigator, uh, a a control
panel, a some, you know, a game
controller, whatever you want to call it
with you in the virtual space,
um,
is can, you know, can be important in
helping you. Maybe it contextualizes it
for you. So instead you maybe you do
have these different sections floating
around as different bits, but then you
have this vert this this linear list of
the way that the author intended them to
flow.
And
I don't know, I'm just thinking out loud
here, but I think there is an argument
there to be made for having uh a
navigation controller
that doesn't just move you around, but
also works through content
&gt;&gt; because I and I just did it on Substack.
I I've never used this before. If you
leave the contents up on the lefth hand
thing, just leave it up and now scroll
the right hand side. It just says, "Hey,
where you're at?" And
&gt;&gt; yeah, so it's
&gt;&gt; it's definitely interacting.
&gt;&gt; So I think in in a VR world, what would
you do? Maybe you'd have each of those
chapter titles be a row of pages
someplace so you could read them right,
left to right, or I don't know, maybe
stacked back to forward or something.
&gt;&gt; So here's here's a related issue because
um
Yeah. No. So, please continue.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. That that what you're doing
the related issue you're going to go
into it. I think that's the same kind of
problem you have with those headings and
the the stuff that's extracted out. You
know, how do you do the
&gt;&gt; So, there is a difference I find between
navigation and overview.
So, if you go to an outline, which is
what that was,
it's really not always that useful. I
mean, now I'm zooming in, so it's only
level one. And if I know I want to go to
cutings, fine. But when you're reading
something fresh,
how often do you know that you want to
jump from the intellectual sparring
partner to scaling the unscalable? It's
something that I love. I would have
loved to have made this. But I also
think it is not that useful
for for that reason. So this is why I've
been experimenting with you know why did
you choose to leave the text? It's
either to go somewhere else that you
know as a kind of a reader a proof
reader of your own work or it's to get a
clue of how it connects. Right. So
that's why the difference between
&gt;&gt; it's a second reading and you're trying
to find navigate your way back to oh I
remember reading this in this section.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; And and then going straight to the
section and then you only have to review
that chunk of text instead of scanning
through everything to get to the to get
to that point.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. 100%. That's what I mean by
navigation.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; So, yeah, absolutely. We're talking
about the same thing. So, if you now
want to check what you've written, if
you want then you may want to go to the
overview which serves a different
function, right? So, in an overview um
as as you all know the question is in
addition to the headings what should
appear
you know there there are many different
ways to design that. Um the user
themselves can choose keywords, color
keywords, you know, all these things can
be
added.
You know, it really depends on what you
need. So here here's a different view
where you have these keywords generated
and there's a very specific one for
citations.
So here you see under structuring this
is these are the titles that have been
cited with the author and date. Right?
So that's what I mean that is worthwhile
discussing is I'm going get out of
sharing mode here
is uh why do you not want to see the
whole text because you don't always
is it to go somewhere else? Is it to
find something that you're looking for
that you don't know? Is it to as an
author or reader understanding the spine
of the argument? Is it to see what backs
it up and how can we more spatialize
this?
I think I think it's it's this it's the
um and okay so uh a little disclosure
here uh and that is I usually write
these things uh and then I I I drop them
into Gemini and say where are the
natural breaks here and I have it
generate those titles because I don't
always see them and I of course I'm not
just blind I don't just blindly put them
in but then I see a connection I'm like
okay yeah that makes sense or maybe I'll
rephrase raise the wording a little bit
or I will leave one out or add another
one. But it gives me a huge head start
and also gives me a different set of
eyeballs
because I have a mental idea of where I
think the brakes are, but I want to
design them so you know where the breaks
are. You know where the sections are as
the reader because at this point I'm not
writing for myself, I'm writing for a
reader. So, uh, having the AI help me
with that is really is really handy. Um,
and so having something built into the
VR system that makes it easier for the
reader to navigate
their way through an argument then and
yeah, concept map might be one way of
doing it, but concept maps are
complicated.
You know, it's in I've I've I've spent a
lot of time trying to make concept maps
work, right? Um, and in manually, I'm
not talking about and I'm trying to make
them work automatically, too. Uh, and
that's a um, you know, it's there's
always this balancing act. It's just
like game design. You can either make
the game super accurate or you can make
the game playable. And usually those two
things don't don't b work work together.
And the same thing is true with a with a
uh, concept map. You can make the
concept map comprehensive or you can
make it visually readable and and and
having both of those at the same time is
almost impossible. So
&gt;&gt; now you see how I talk to my
programmers.
&gt;&gt; We used Jira and for instance now I
thought that text was too large the
connective text. So I'm just going to do
this real quick because there is a point
to it. Um,
&gt;&gt; you just made a connection.
&gt;&gt; Exactly.
&gt;&gt; Making your connection.
&gt;&gt; Connection about your connection about
your See, this this gets really It makes
your head spin after a while.
&gt;&gt; It It does. But but the reason I'm
showing you this is not to show you guys
a concept map because obviously you know
very very well what that is. It goes
back to figure and ground again because
having one concept map is not enough.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Right. So here uh because uh as you saw
this is all based on the sciency stuff
right so I then made a uh a map of um
here it is with concept which is too
much I mean citations this is if
anybody's interested in any of it you
know you can see a little bit how it
relates it's basically a glossery more
than anything else
&gt;&gt; so prefrontal oh yeah that's oh and then
you can without looking at the map you
click on this and you can navigate
around it as well, right? So, it's
another layer, but this is only dealing
with brain regions,
right? That is not enough for a proper
document. So, down here I have things
about the software which is a bit kind
of added on. So, if we could have some
way of um here's the hippoc campus we
talked a lot about uh which is coming up
as a link.
If we had ways of um reusing our concept
maps or maps or whatever we call it, I
think that would be incredibly useful.
If we have ways of linking them within
our documents, that will be incredibly
useful. I would very much like to be
able to link to the concept map of your
article from for instance,
&gt;&gt; you know, but not as a citation but
linking to those.
And as a developer, this is really
difficult because Mojit, as you very
well know, these are segregated things,
&gt;&gt; right? They're not necessarily allowed
to connect.
&gt;&gt; Um, so this is why again figuring
ground, how do I
how do I choose what is in my space?
&gt;&gt; Mhm. It's an incredibly difficult
discussion to have
because conceptually we just like
everything there and then we have a
little piece of text we're reading right
now but it's all there. What does all
there mean? Right.
&gt;&gt; Mhm. I mean, Tom, I could imagine you
putting on the headset and reading a
student paper that has um a chat, but it
also has, let's say, you make your
students define the core concepts of
what they're writing about. Because by
writing a definition, they have to say
what they think it is. And you see that
in some kind of a map, you should be
able to at ease be able to have that in
your map. So you could either show that
student how it fits or doesn't fit
um and also have it compared with what
you're doing.
And then we get into another topic which
is
clearly you learn more by defining by
yourself
but it's not really scalable. Sometimes
you want stuff defined for you.
you probably want your own stuff curated
in a special collection or grabable
thing. Whereas, for instance, Moheit, a
lot of the art stuff we talked about
last week, I would want that as a
separate thing that it could be
augmented through wikis or AI or
whatever that I can kind of dip into.
You know what I mean? So, how do you
visually and interactively connect those
two?
So much of the discussion around the
technologies is I want everything now.
Once we start having everything now,
that's quickly becoming too much.
&gt;&gt; The Verooa salt problem.
&gt;&gt; Explain. Sounds very well dawned.
&gt;&gt; It's Willy Wonka and the chocolate
factory. I want it now. I want it now.
&gt;&gt; Ends up blowing up and
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Yeah,
&gt;&gt; I remember.
&gt;&gt; That's right. Yes.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
Just a few thoughts. I these are not
structured thoughts and maybe you know
these are very rudimentary. So when we
were thinking about Tom's article uh you
know and uh thinking you know what can
we do uh with it if uh we uh to put it
up in space would uh would uh you know
what are the ways of imagining it in
space. So it occurred to me that uh you
know we uh this uh scroll thing you know
that you start off at the top and then
you make your way through to the end. Uh
this is uh this is a very specific sort
of articulating our thoughts. We
elucidate uh you know even research
papers or uh general articles or papers
we write like that. We start off and
then we arrive at the end and that paper
that a whole argument is composed of
various different arguments which the
author connects in a particular manner.
Now those concepts those arguments they
themselves may be composed of very
others components which we usually do
with uh you know we connect with
hyperlinks and those hyperlinks uh are
you know with the present interfaces
they're opaque you click on the click on
one and you're taken to a different
window that you know which is sort of
disconnected with it with the present
window. So uh you know if we are to
think that the any paper or any text of
uh of a decent size is composed of
various other of of things which the
author has taken the liberty of
articulating of connecting in a
particular manner
then uh you know when we are thinking of
uh presenting it in a 3D space
then maybe we
Think of decomposing it. Deconstructing
it. Not decomposing, deconstructing it.
Uh wherein uh the you know
uh um
uh uh like you know we have static
hyperlinks. We can make dynamic
hyperlinks like you know just like uh
you would ask uh maybe you know like the
recent iteration of in the demos of Siri
that you would ask something specific
and Siri would based on your personal
context would present you certain
things. uh you know maybe we can do that
with dynamic hyperlinks that you know
the author uh Tom has illustrated four
concepts and uh uh these concepts what
what do they mean for mo and uh Tom has
connected them in this particular manner
in this chronology in his article that
he goes from this to this because any
author in a thing we are trying to build
on thing so we are trying to build on uh
you know what came before and then this
so that you know the third part of the
article has already uh built up on the
previous two parts. So the fourth part
if you were to read it uh like you know
just straight ahead our understanding of
the fourth part would be different had
if we have not read the previous three.
Uh but you know but a lot of times maybe
we can take the liberty of
deconstructing uh a piece of information
uh because you know as long as we are uh
restricted to this uh
the traditional writing mode which goes
uh you know from left to right and from
up to down and we have to go through it.
So there may not be a a lot of creative
ways of presenting uh th this format
even in 3D spaces. Maybe these are just
my thoughts, you know.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Um
I mean a lot of it comes down to as you
said earlier we got to have the
information to build the systems and
secondly the really thorny or not thorny
difficult question of how would we
actually interact with it. It's
relatively easy to say we should be able
to take this and look at it that way.
&gt;&gt; But then what do we mean by look at it
that way becomes becomes a challenge.
I mean, I know that I've learned a lot
from doing author vision OS over the
last six months because a lot of it is
wrong. You know, like the little
information blocks in space, they're too
heavy, you know, that kind of stuff. But
you got to build it to find out. And
it's it's it's hard.
It's um yeah, it's hard to figure out.
And I've decided
um I'm going to release Author Vision in
the middle of next month and then I have
to stop development. It's just very
expensive and it's been stressful to try
to solve the problems of XR and I've
decided that's not what I have to do.
What I have to do is just enough for
Apple to be interested enough to help me
promote it a little bit.
It it's basically marketing.
But even to do marketing means we have
to think of something sexy, something
fun, something engaging. Because the
first thing when someone puts on the
headset, I don't know if you have the
same experience, but someone can move a
piece of information from here to here.
Literally mind-blowing.
&gt;&gt; But then after a few hours or days, it
becomes that was cool, but why?
&gt;&gt; Now we got to get to the wow of the
work.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. You're not moving paragraphs like,
oh, I can edit my document by dragging
paragraphs around. that goes just like
okay 10 15 20 minutes and that's like
&gt;&gt; I want to copy control x control v is a
lot faster.
Yeah. No, exactly. There there is um
I mean you remember the beginning of
mobile phones,
you know, some people would say
obviously they were very expensive and
not everybody had them. So it was like
if it's important they'll call back.
Remember that argument
and then you know we kind of became
addicted to them. So
call waiting.
Well, I remember that the interface I
mean you got, you know, Palm Pilot,
Blackberry, you know, the kind of
interfaces that encourage people to do
certain
behave in certain ways when you got this
a thing, you know, this size or smaller,
half the size. Now, um,
it was interesting psychology to figure
out how they made that work for as many
years as it worked before it died off
&gt;&gt; really. Insightful, Peter, because
having half the device be a keyboard
really presents the affordance of that
device as a typing device.
&gt;&gt; Yeah,
&gt;&gt; it's it's what it does. Um, so Moheit,
the book that you recommended, designing
medium, talks about everything having a
kind of a direction or a what was what
was the word? Can you remember?
affordances.
&gt;&gt; No. Um
&gt;&gt; flow. Some flowy thing, right?
&gt;&gt; No, not even flowy. More along the lines
of was that
&gt;&gt; performing.
&gt;&gt; No. Um
&gt;&gt; no,
&gt;&gt; having a a direction like an egg will
always roll downhill. That kind of
thing.
&gt;&gt; Disposition.
&gt;&gt; Disposition. Thank you. Disposition.
Right. So, this strongly the keyboard
strongly presented a disposition as
being primarily typing device. Um, and
then of course the other devices now are
a more flexible and also a a viewing
device. It's a screen to give you stuff.
How can we take this thinking Oh god, we
only have two minutes. How can we take
what you said now, Peter, into XR?
Um, what is it we need to remove?
What what is the equivalent of the
keyboard on the phone in XR at this
point?
&gt;&gt; Certainly isn't the virtual one that you
try to type on that has no tactile feel.
That's just toy. That's that's
litter.
&gt;&gt; But what else should be removed to give
us closer to our information? Because I
I agree with that for sure. Yeah.
Well,
I'm thinking given you're in the Apple
headset, you have a lot of gaze things
that are not are not familiar to me in
most of the VR things I've been able to
do. And eye tracking wasn't part of most
of the things I've been able to play
with. The fact that you can gaze and
click or gaze and have the focus
automatically, you know, you're doing
the phobia thing basically. You're
bringing the stuff that's important as
you just move your eyes around. Now, how
fast that works. Is there a lag? You can
get that spin and circle kind of thing
problem. That's something I think
because you can hold everything in the
headset, most documents will be really
fast saying the the zooiness of it. Oh,
that's clear text. The text off to the
side is, you know, chicken scratchings.
It's not, you know, you can't really
read it until you turn your head, then
it focuses up.
Whether that's just
&gt;&gt; using the phobia point of view thing or
if you're going to have that be oh
that's a purposeful thing you push it to
the back or it's a um information hiding
thing but I think you want that to be um
constructed you as an author are placing
things at particular or you as a reader
might you position them but then you
want them at those positions so you can
go back and say that thing over here
reach for like reaching for things in a
library I know the book is behind me at
the left I can pull it out and that's my
Java reference or you know whatever the
heck I'm doing. Um I don't have to even
look at the book after a while. I know
where it is in the library. I just feel
the bumps and pull it out. That kind of
thing where you viewing the reader can
maybe structure things differently than
the author has and then save it. It's a
it's the the spatial presentation
doesn't change. Like when you do another
AI generated summary, the nodes explode.
Now you got to actually read every node
to figure out what they are versus
there's a position for that that's going
to stay that chapter is going to stay
there that paragraph or whatever node
&gt;&gt; so that I know I can always reach over
here or walk over here to get to it.
This I think that's going to be key is
um the fragmentation you make out of it
with AI or by authoring that layout is
your mind palace your cathedral that you
want to have. And if you can support
that that's
I strongly agree with you Peter. Uh in
my world right now that is called
context.
&gt;&gt; So that's it's not a great name but the
idea is you build a thing and you know
where those where that knowledge
sculpture is no matter what else you're
working on. So it can be visually
physically in the background if you want
but it's um interactable
either with everything else or
separately.
because that way you know that certain
things are where certain things should
be but you can still see them in
relation to other things. So this is
100% figure and ground. This is exactly
what we're talking about. Yeah. Uh
Peter, please.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. One other possibility would be
sort of mirror the fourth programming
language in VR with an implicit data
stack. So I look at an object that would
have the behavior of pushing it onto the
stack. I look at another object, that
object's ID would be pushed onto the
stack. And then if I looked at a command
object, it would be able to access the
stack, pop those last two items off, do
something with them, and then drop a new
context on the stack.
&gt;&gt; What would the what would those types of
objects contain?
&gt;&gt; I might look at three or four book
references and each one of those books
go onto the stack. Then I could look at
the command for you know list authors
and that would tell it and then be able
basically tell from the context the fact
that the last thing I was looking at was
you know the history of hypertext or
something as a title. Then I look at the
list authors and without having to do
anything else just by the temporal ju
just position of the items the system
would be able to know what to be working
on. So I wouldn't have to drag something
over and explicitly drop it. It would
know the last thing, the last item I was
looking at was a particular book over,
you know, in the upper leftand corner of
my room. Then I look at my command
pallet and I look at what I want done.
It could simply pluck off of the context
stack of the sequence of things I've
been looking at, get that list for me
and display it. Or, of course, the
result would be pushed back onto the
context stack. So then I could go
somewhere else and maybe touch a show
things here object and then it would
automatically know what data to load
onto that panel when I touch the virtual
panel.
&gt;&gt; Games with the sequence at which things
are focused on in the space.
&gt;&gt; If you could uh sketch that out that
would be very interesting, Peter.
&gt;&gt; Okay, I'll try to explore that a little
bit for next week.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. to see how that would actually
look.
Um, right. So, one of the things we
established today is that figure and
ground is a rich topic.
It's going to take a while to drill
further down. Um, any closing comments
for today or suggestions for the future
or anything?
&gt;&gt; Oh, I made a comment about RSA. I'm
thinking about the um presentations that
have the flow or the there's a infinite
diagram that kind of turns and rotates
and has kind of like a cartoonish like
you know you're drawing the figures as
you go.
&gt;&gt; I'm trying to find the reference to it.
I'm actually I get confused by the Royal
Academy of Sciences uh site
Royal Society of Arts.
Yeah, there are so many decisions to be
made like are we talking sculptures,
cubes, walls,
floating. I think from from my
perspective, looking at what you're
doing, not in the headset so much and I
don't have an Apple headset to play
with, but looking at it in terms of what
I'd like to see in a 3D environment that
put hanging my documents up in, you
know, like you're drawing photographs in
a room or on clothes lines or whatever
it is, having that physicality saying I
can break a document up and maybe the AI
explodes at first one and then I move it
around. have that be my mind palace for
their mind my copy of that document that
book um so I can go back in and just
reach for it or know that it's there
that that that's almost a degraded form
of what you're trying to do but I think
just that alone would be a great
facility like I have a PDF I have a
bunch of library books and I have my uh
slicing and dicing of it for my project
or my
workspace whatever we're going to call
that context is a little bit too, like
you say, bland terms.
&gt;&gt; It is.
&gt;&gt; We'll have to keep thinking. And thank
you very, very much, guys. Uh, I look
forward to Monday week. Have a great
week.
&gt;&gt; Bye, everyone. Bye.
&gt;&gt; Take care. Bye. Bye.
