 Hey, man. Hi, Fred. Let's see. The video was known. So let's get rid of the note taker. I've tried to remove it before. It's from a guy who was in the community. He's a good guy. Nothing wrong with him, but right. This note taker is a lot more than he is. Oh. Yeah, I wonder how that works. I have a, so I don't take up the main session. Yeah, we missed you last week. You're OK, right? Yeah, I'm fine. OK. We can't all go to all sessions. So nothing wrong with that. OK, hang on. Here's the meeting chat for chat we didn't have. Get that out of the way. Yeah, I had the weirdest kind of AI thing the other day with the best, you know, the mobs. OK. Sorry. I'm getting a build here of knowledge space. So yeah, moving everything, almost everything across the knowledge base. Because there were so many apps like digital letters, augmented library, or dummy text. So now knowledge base will be literally the space for these different things. But today I reworked how it takes in transcripts from our meetings as well, the transcripts with AI chats. OK, good. That's kind of fun. So you envision it as one app for everything we're doing or just can get really bitching, not one app for everything. So I look, hang on, it's OK, it did a thing. I'm just going to build it. More of a gathering place up. Right. So absolutely not everything. So for instance, hang on, I've got to test this before I can show you. I need to do it. I don't know. It's about what is it doing? Open source. No, that is not the source. I'm so excited to show you this, but it's got to work. That's just liquid view. It's not a liquid view. Hey. That's it. Hey. So as when you demo it to someone else, to your boss, it's going to fail. That's the rule, right? I may not have built the app, but that may be a problem. Yeah, not exactly. And in this, you guys are definitely my boss. Yeah. Hang on just trying to close and up the ship. Oh my gosh. I got three copies of knowledge based running. That's not what we need. Good. How are you Peter? It's the being healthy and hot here in North Carolina. And no, not enough rain. Yeah, we have that here as well. It's a stressful. It's stressful. Right. Yeah. I had a. Do you even have air conditioning? Most of my friends in England do not. We do because we have a family friend in Norway who was an electrician. And he suggested we get the air source heat pump for heat. So it's really quite efficient in the winter. And magically, it just happens to include cooling. So yes, we have it, but not because we specifically were not looking for it. Well, heat pump can work either way, you know, just set the temperatures. Yeah. So that's that's kind of a very lucky there. So I have no idea who's coming today. No, Bramble's not coming. He had an appointment. So he could not make it. Tom is almost here. And no, Tom is there. Yes, miss. Miss last week I wouldn't make Tuesday. So I hope your trip went well, which but. Yeah, we went to the island of Sark, the world's first designated dark island. So there was. I'm trying to. It's an interesting discussion on last week's calls. So if you haven't watched the video, I recommend it. Yeah, I agree. There was a lot of good stuff last week. I just have to tell plot something. Don't expect to repeat this week. I'm kind of tired. That's fine. We'll see how it goes. I haven't I haven't I've been having all the usual arguments with my friends about the anthem reformerizing the AIs a little bit too much. And yeah, it's colloquial. Yeah, it's the way we relate to things. But then you start equating, you know, the false equivalent starts happening. You know, oh, she becomes your girlfriend. You know, that kind of saying has starts happening. It's psychological. And I think the middle, the middle ray is the smart way. I do I do treat my AIs like they are people in the sense of conversation partners. And they have different personalities and I can make them different. And I don't and I believe them anymore than I believe a human. So you know, if a human comes to me and says the sky is pink, I'm going to go check that out. And so that's that's part of the deep part of the drill. But I mean, Claude has a very different personality than Gemini, for instance, in terms of how you interact with it. And that has to do with the model building. And I think it's kind of healthy in that sense to think of them as having the fallibility of humans. I think one of the problems we have with AI as we expect them to be infallible like the enterprise computer. And it's not right. It's the Oracle versus the partner problem that I've been writing about and thinking out a lot lately. Keep, keep writing. I love, I love seeing when you're writing hits me. It's good. I'm sorry for referring on the other side. Somebody reads it. Besides the AIs, you know, I read the, I would have a problem with AIs reading it, they'll share it widely. I read your articles about makers from several years ago. Oh, yeah. Yeah, that was good. Yeah. I think you can nail on the head there, Tom, with the personalities because we now have to learn how to deal with different AIs. Their personalities, their poivots, the limits. There was somebody who posted a while ago and I'm sure you will agree. If you know the field, AI is an accelerator. If you don't, it can lead you down all kinds of wrong paths. I think that's really important. So with Edgar, he's nine. Some of his friends use a bit of AI. We told him, no, if he wants to use AI, fine, do it with the parents. So we do it in a discourse, but also it being bored, being clueless, not knowing, is so important. If you get answers too quickly, what happens to our imagination, right? Yeah, but I would, I would push back on that a little bit because the, again, if you're using it to get answers, you're probably not doing it using it right. You still have, you have to be able to, as I, as I like to say, the AI should provide you with questions, not answers. And so if you can engage in a, in a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, dialogue with the day, AI can be tremendously powerful, but there it's your, it's your mind doing the work then. Well, it, obviously it depends on the use case because if he wants to, you know, that dinosaurs have feathers, that's relatively straightforward with lots of, they're different parts to them. Yeah. But, you know, different knowledge work that you're dealing with absolutely. I mean, dealing with, you can get that off a Wikipedia though, you know? No, no, exactly. That's a lot. Yes, that, that is a huge thing. A lot of AI stuff is something people should be able to just look up, but really doesn't need a, I'm hoping to finish this bill there. I hope it's not too distracting. Google sort of solves that problem for a while. And now it's given up on it and run, rolled around the clock backwards. So it's like the problem with the problem I have with not using AI to do that sort of stuff is the fact that the search engines all suck so bad that it's quicker to find things with the AI and then verify them. Then it is to try to go through pages of results, half of which are trying to sell you something you have nothing, has nothing to do with your query. You know? And then that lets you consume more tokens, which is the price, you know, that's where they make their money. It's like, well, no, I'm talking about just to straight up Google search. Yeah, we're just talking to the analysts and analyzing of the results to say, well, just give me what I want out of the Google search because it's giving me all the ads. Yeah, I never do that. I simply say, give me five sources that talk about X and give me links to them. And then I go back and I check the sources, you know, if it's important at all. Yeah. So I like when AI, when doing research at fine sources that I might not have found, for example, I found something about a hack a day project that used zigzag. I would have never found that on my own. Right. And that's the needle in the haystack problem. And again, that's the lateral thinking stuff that I've been trying to work with with the knowledge navigator, trying to get to with a knowledge navigator in that I want people to do that on a routine basis, because I think there's an awful lot of insight. I mean, I went for 25 years. Yes, thereabouts in computing before I ever heard of Doug Engelbart. And I, you know, and I opened a whole universe of things, but it only happened because I was doing a seminar on a new media that a friend of mine at the new media consortium had put together and it was on the syllabus. And so, you know, he put together a syllabus and that was part of it. And I didn't go there looking for that. And I end up teaching it for 10 years and my own constitution. And why isn't that information more widely known? Well, I'm a six-team, Mo and all that, you know. I challenge, I challenge you to go to anybody with a computer science degree and ask the who Doug Engelbart is. And I don't think I've ever gotten anybody's at all. Who? And maybe, maybe the guy who invented the mouse, maybe. But that's about it, you know, it's best. And forget about Ted Nelson or Alan Kay or any of those guys, because it's just not important, you know. There's something about that that's kind of interesting that just came up today and yesterday because I showed somewhat interact list that I've shown you guys. And I showed it to someone who's clever but completely outside of the field or anything to do with computers. And, you know, I showed here are the airplanes, the other clouds, you move it around, do the layers. And he said, oh, yeah, my son has this cool app where you can point to the sky and it shows you what the aircraft is. Oh, cool. And I'm trying to find out that there is no term. I've really done research for one, one, two, three, four, five, four, five, four, five, but there is no term. I've really done research for one. You show something that there's a lot of effort behind. I mean, it could be a movie, for instance, the new Spider-Man movie, right, which is amazing. You should say it, we did not afterwards that the web swinging down the street. He actually did that. It's not CGI. Right. But we haven't, we have a two more joining fantastic. Let's see if we get audio. Okay, we had a better video, maybe audio. Give them a few more seconds. I'd see more can you hear us? Yes. Hi, new dad. Thank you for taking time to join us non-baby people. I think he's right. So the point of the story that I started talking about is when I'm sure you all have the same experience as well. You show something that you built to someone. And they have absolutely no clue. What, sorry, that's my brother. They have no clue of the field, so they don't have to find it. Right, so they don't know. It's a computer thing. Computers can do everything. What ways is this different, right? They don't understand the layers. And when I talk to Claude about this, trying to find the terminology, it said, well, this is what Doug had his whole life. It was a computer thing. All the augmentation, all the layers, Timor can see, you know, that's ignored by people. Timor, just really briefly, I was just sharing a story and I'm sure you've had the same thing. That's kind of interesting of how you build something. You're really proud of it. The luck went into it. And people outside the field, they have a gap of understanding what goes into it. They said, oh, the computer did that, okay, great. And one of the things Claude came back with was, this is why our future text lab Mondays meet things are so important. If we have something to show in a community, where are the few people who get what's behind it? Right, so it's so important. And of course, what did Doug call it? He called it a neck, right? Networked improvement community, except him done that working really well. One more day, I think, just to start and finish. You all know the Moved Best Bar, right? Italian kind of round it. For me, as a non-Italian, it seems quite a feminine thing, but they're also quite cool. But I can't imagine myself going down the street with it, right? So I just, I've had an idea on and off for a long time. Just today, I asked a normal image thing to make a more masculine version of it. So. Right? It looks like more like a slightly military 1930s bike, but you have said, you know, I'm not going to bore you with the image itself. So that was fine. Then I asked Claude to write a letter to Vespa because I couldn't find who to send it to. Just as a fun thing, just to get that notion out of your head, right? And it said, there isn't a direct channel that I found a name. This is where they're doing that kind of research. By the way, this goes against the design language because Vespa is explicitly about this Kirby stuff. However, this is much more similar to what Pond is doing for a specific range. Right? Because I uploaded the image. I don't know why just to be polite. So you talk to him about treating it like a human. When you know, do you give it what you would give a human? It has the more contact. So when online did the research look at the design aesthetics, compared it with what else is in the market, and the final paragraph it came back with was, however, there's a recent you should still consider sending it to them. So I wrote a letter and I sent it. Isn't that absolutely amazing wide reasoning for an AI? Take a design image and just compare stuff. I'd never even ask it to look at it. Yeah. What's behind the AI? It's a multi-dimensional space and it's embeddings of words and language. Welcome, Hiner. Hello. It's more more about how did I get the motivation to do that? You didn't tell it. Do this broad analysis of it. There was there's an impetus there in the way that and that's the interesting thing is that is that emergent? Is that part of their pre training? You know, because there's a lot of stuff hidden in the prompting that gets you to do that. One of the things that I use it for is that if I see something strange and I'm like, what the heck is that? I'll just take a picture of it and upload it. Like the other day I was walking through around the the neighborhood. Let me share screens here briefly. And there's this thing stuck on the side of a telephone pole and and I couldn't figure out what it was. And I'm like, what is this and why is it where it is and all this sort of thing? And it turns out it's a it's a critter cam to take images of, you know, you use them out for hunting or something like that. But it stuck on the side of a street and says, well, sometimes people use them for security devices, but this is illegal because it's stuck to a telephone pole and the phone company or the electric company will remove it. But in any case, I mean, thinking about what on earth I suspect in my home on a person's association decided that was helpful. Who's pointed toward a sock walk too? Now, who cares who walks by this thing, right? But they did. Yeah, but I had no idea what it was. I could tell it was a camera, but I could no idea. And the fact that I could get dropped it into Gemini and have it figure that out. Literally as I was walking down the street, that's pretty cool. It is cool that I'm the the wrinkle with the design was I didn't ask it. It literally said, this is not appropriate for this, but these other guys are doing it. So it was at least two levels of reasoning away from the source material, which was pretty wild. But I'm hoping to build something to more and Hiner, good to see you. I'm to show a new aspect of a way to send something around. So that's why my eyes keep flipping about a bit. So I apologize. It worked earlier. You know how it is. And then you're going to show to your friends and it goes a bit sideways. So yeah, there will be something. But please, what have we got us a topic today that's outside of AI? You're charged. Yeah, but I'm just trying to get less done real quick. Well, I'm the only thing I quit the link to Steve Yegge's thing about his his use of his is a guy who develops a video game called Wiver and is getting all hyped up about it. But he's got some interesting writeups about how he's using it to build his little software manufacturing agents and whatnot. And I thought his writings a bit long winded, but he comes up with some interesting things. And I share that link around to folks to get some comments. It's a long read unfortunately, but I heard him on a podcast, not too long ago talking about gas town. Yeah, he's a really interesting concept because he's gone from gas town to a new thing. And he says, here's what I learned now. And what's going to happen and he gets he backs his philosophical on second part of the series of the article there. But I found a good to read. And you say, okay, good. I'm glad he's doing all this and spending all this time and money. I can kind of just leverage his as I write my own little, you know, trying to do my own little development shop for my laptop and small AI kind of mini models. This is what I'm using just because it becomes. And most people are still on the AI is vending machine. You know, it's Google and steroids mindset. And I was talking to my chair, which is yesterday and he was like, he finally got around to, okay, yeah, I can ask him more than one question at a time. And I'm like, yeah. And I wrote a piece a few months ago saying never ask a chat about one question. Yeah. So that. So I invited Hiner to this meeting. He's done some amazing work, at least 30 years of amazing projects. And he's interested in the spatial aspect of where technology is going. So Hiner would like to introduce yourself. No. We would really like it if you would like it. I mean, if you would or however it goes. We saw you briefly, but it's good that you're here properly now. So do you have a, like a perspective, introduction to share? Or would you like to listen or how do you want to be here? We're just very grateful that you want it. Okay. Lurking is allowed. Lurking is entirely allowed. Right. Okay. I may have something of a workflow to show you guys. I'm just going to close down a few windows. So this is to spark discussion, obviously. And so what we're going to do. Just see what I have. You I wonder if you were going to say something, then you will need your microphone to be on product. Okay. Thank you for that. Yeah, I don't know what is going on with the builds here, but so it here's the points. Let's just start this again. I'm obviously I'm still working on this, which is why these are all fresh apps and the whole workflow is not fully working. But okay. So here's the interest list you've seen many times. So I'm just going to turn on a few things. So let's pretend you're working on this is this is really important stuff. And then you go. Cytable image. Which should produce an image on the desktop right now it didn't do it. So that's fine. We'll pretend we did. And then we go into author. We put it into a document. Export it when we then open it. It becomes all the metadata of what layers were shown where it was viewed from all of that is included. So but now click on this image. I can click on open source. And you see here it actually worked. This is now a 3d image. This is the globe. So this is an EPUB. So glad it worked. These are whales, by the way, live whale tracking around the world. So you can be in a 3d system. Save an image a PNG with the exit data. Includes all the metadata to recreate the scene. How cool is that? Yeah, that's great. It's a exclusion. It is kind of a trans. Well, I don't know. Transclusions are supposed to be live, but the point is that this is one of those things that I've been going back and forth over years. And I can finally test it. And when I did this with the sound off, it didn't work. It now works. The point of it is I showed Interactless to a close friend the other day. And she did the really annoying thing of saying, how do you take stuff out and what's the point in all of these non fanboy questions, right? And I remember you can store a lot of stuff in an exit in the image information itself. So if you take that along for the ride, you can do this. So the new thing is developed basic 3d modeling app. This is proof of concept only. So I made a first structure. So really it's 3d and that's all it is. Nothing fancy, right? So I export. I do save image. And I put it in desktop and it's probably going to ask me if I'm going over right because I had the testing the same one anyway. And then I go into author. Let's make sure I use the right one. So here we have 3d2. I'll take this new one. Just drag it in. That's all I need to do. Nothing else. And export the image as an ePub. But on the desktop. And now just try everything else when open this ePub. Here it is. Click on that open source. And it opens it and the original as a 3d file. The difference is kind of important. I'm going to go off share. The difference between those two approaches is that the inter Atlas one doesn't need to worry about 3d stuff because it's a known quantity. It's the world. So it just sends stuff saying it was shaded from the sun, the clouds were visible and so on. It doesn't do every single detail. When it sends it to the 3d software. It has to have a 3d file as well. So it goes with IDs and manifest and all of the stuff, all of which can go into the ePub. So what happens is we use brandels, model elements in the HTML for the ePub. That intelligently refers to the full 3d file that's hidden in the ePub. So all of this is completely open. It happens to work with my software because it's proof of concept. So in the settings, if you want to use other 3d software or whatever, you just say so. So that the closure of this thing that I think is kind of cool is knowledge. I think we all agree in our community is at least partly about connections. So the media and tools we use should really utilize connections commercial companies don't do that. They have to own stuff right. Google Earth cannot do the kind of layers we're talking about. We can do all kinds of layers in Google Earth. We have to download a file and it's you can't do it as a link. We have an opportunity to take all kinds of knowledge stuff and make it exquisitely shareable. So yeah, that was kind of fun. We wanted to project Xanadu where you were just making all these connections and preserving them forever. That was the ideal that this is a snapshot of the earth as of today. Yeah, the idea is that obviously I'm old about text text text and interact is this very showy. I'm very proud of it. Very happy. But it's not all that much about text. So this is a way that forces these things together. In fact, many years ago, it was in Germany, doing a presentation and I'm talking to your professor was interested in World War two history, particularly down to German aircraft. So we talked about how the image itself could carry its own image map in the exit. So if you clicked on the plane, you'll get information about the plane you clicked on the sky. You'll get information about the weather that day. Clicked on the ground. They'll give you information about the location, that kind of stuff. So by using the exit metadata in PNG, we're going towards that now. And Peter was ill go having been here through years. You probably remember discussions around how much 3D stuff we could possibly flatten into an image and then re-modelize, right? Now we can start doing that because we've all done everything because the capability we get from AI support and code. I mean, the 3D app that you saw, it was a one shot. I haven't modified it because I haven't really started using it. It's just to show that a 3D thing can be part of it. Everything else is taken weeks, but we can do stuff now. It's amazing. Also, Interactless is now available iOS, macOS, and vision OS. So if you downloaded, you can play with it. So like an iOS, would it be you're able to use an iPad like an augmented reality viewer? On the iPad and iPhone, it literally is. You don't have the solar system. You just have this. So you have the earth. Right. And you have the layers and the levels. And that's it. The ecosystem works across because if you're on the headset and you're reading an e-bub, if you click open source, it'll open the 3D system on vision OS. So you get a special environment immediately. If it's iPad, it'll open an iPad if you're mac, it'll open on that. It's extensible to use on windows and other environments. I asked you all to show you enter. I'll give you a 20 second summary of what we talked about. It's possible now in the system we're playing around with to be in a 3D environment like the interactless or a 3D modeling thing. We give an image to PNG and all the stuff that's in it becomes part of the exit, the metadata of the PNG. But that in a work process are exported as an e-pub. And it remains with all the metadata to reconstitute what it was. And click on the flattened PNG to open it back into the original 3D software with the same layout. Okay. So that's kind of cool. Very cool actually. I mean, we live through decades of PDFs and images being flat. And you know, now we can start putting some life back into them, right? Very interesting. Now if you could just get the metadata to auto generate. Yeah, that's super easy. What do you mean by that? Well, I hate to keep banging the AI drum, but I mean, the thing is that I only need metadata like with that picture I showed earlier. I only need metadata if I actually can. If I actually have the information I'm looking for to put on it, the image, right? So I'm. As someone who it's one thing for me to give you an image and tell you about what I know about that image, right? It's another thing though. If I run into something completely on my own that I don't have XF data for and that I don't have anybody to explain to me. Yeah, if I were out there with the right person, maybe a hunter or something to go, oh, yeah, that's exactly what that is. It's a little different though, Tom, because what happens here is you're in a 3D environment. Yeah, and you build something like let's say you're a climate scientist because one of the things we have is pollution data over time. We have weather patterns. So you can choose what layers to put what timeline to put when you export that you can do it as a CSV and it's really boring. And I can export it as a rendered image. Distribute as a PDF people can read your scientific reports. And if they choose to, then they can open it back in the 3D interactive environment. You all know Jupiter notebooks, right? So that's really phenomenal stuff. You can change things in the document, which we should clearly try to do in EPUB as well. But this is just another step. Let's imagine this was a double helix molecule or something in a shoulder protein interaction. The fact that the data to reconstitute it is in the image. It means that we have a really super simple way to share things. So of course, I agree with you, Tom, how you discover and how you come across a highly interactive and how you share with it. It's really, really important. The other side of that though is that it is it is a constrict. In the sense that I tell you what's important about my image. And that's all that matters because I am the Oracle again. We get back to that. But maybe you or an AI will recognize something in that image that I completely missed. You know, maybe the climate scientist is saying these are the layers that matter. And then something that well, what other contra, you know, what are their contradictory evidence is they're out there. Or is there something else that's driving this and all of a sudden it shows you a layer that they didn't put in. That's actually really interesting. And that I'm glad you said that because that's the whole entire point. Yeah. Right. So what is cool about the earth is that it exists in real space, meaning that we have real coordinates and share time to make sense. So it's exactly what you're saying can be done. So you see all these whale migrations or whatever it might be that interests you. Because it's an open system, you can actually say, well, how does that relate to tuna? And it's relatively trivial for you to bring that other information. And because you were given it in a spatial setting. So absolutely. That's the work and go Peter, let me have a look at that. But please search the app store. Oh, really? Oh, there is not interact. I went to the entry for the app and the app store and has the website link. I click the website link. And then as far as it says that the site is in reachable. Yeah, that's the wrong link. I'll fix that. So thank you very much. Okay. That's very useful. So yeah, there are many ways now we can encode stuff and decode stuff. That's kind of, but I want to re-emphasize the importance of what Tom said. I passionately hate very few things in the world. But one thing I absolutely hate is the notion of CD runs from the 90s because to me, I'm going to put more information gettos. And I'm sure you agree. This is preaching to the choir. There's one perspective. Take care of it. Effle, right? And then you got the other side of it, which is the web where you have mutually fighting things, but they have no real semantic connections. But once we start building structures like this, we have one world. Tom can put one climate thing. And then Peter can put something else and they can completely disagree with each other. And then you can use different data sets. And that's the whole point. You can now have that discussion. Well, I do have one thing to say in defense of shovelware CD runs from the 90s. Once you own it, you own it and you don't have to worry about link rot taking out. So, for instance, I had one that was an AI archive of tons of using it articles and original software repos, most of which you can't find today. I completely agree with that 100%. And that philosophy is so close to what we're doing here. And that's a different functional space. I bet you that data does exist somewhere. That may be not on a poll, maybe not on a piece of plastic. Yeah, but I'm just going to say that I very strongly agree with Peter because everything we're doing here is like Eric and I've been talking about. It's all individual pieces of data you can take and own. It's a Jason or whatever, right? When you when you have it and someone else is serving you're renting you're not only ownership is important. You should be able to connect to what you own. So, if there's a track on the CD or an image that I want to use in my research, maybe I'm connecting it to something in inter atlas that we should have that flexibility. And then if somebody else is finding a CD player to connect to your computer these days. Right. You got to save all your old computers. Yeah, I mean, that's that's where things get really interesting. Our vintage computer hobbyist who could help you out. Yeah, where's your zip drive? I figured I'm a shot. So this discussion then goes back to what we've been talking about many times over the last few months, which is what are the data? What are the knowledge objects we're talking about? Right. So in this situation, how do we connect them? So, I mean, how we connect them is what we're solving, but the question is which ones to connect like in Tom and my example. I have shown something to him in that, let's say the spatial thing. And he says that's kind of cool and then Peter has a look at it and says, well, you're. Ignore this layer or this aspect or whatever. But the fact that we can share it and we can change it. And not just with specialized 3D software, but also kind of relatively normal academic discourse. Then now we have gotten to the luxurious point of choosing what the heck do we want in there? So, can I know I'm sorry, I want to jump back for a second to something you said a little bit earlier when we're talking about CD ROMs. So, what I want to say is that, you know, Stephen Johnson talks about three different kinds of networks. There's the aerial network, which is like the web. There's a lot of ideas floating around there, but there's very little for them to gain purchase on. Then there's the solid network, the analogy would be the CD ROM. And once it's there, it's there. You can't reconnect those ideas in a different way. You're stuck with those sets of connections that were put into the CD ROM and frozen in place. And the ideal network from an innovation standpoint is a liquid network. So, where the analogy would be like a river, and you have a set of structures that channel the river and give it purpose and direction. But it's also flexible enough to come up with new channels and things like that. And that's I think a very useful analogy. It's he means it in the context of innovation and networks of people. But, you know, networks of ideas are the same as networks of people in that sense. So, you know, thinking of thinking of that in terms of how do we build a liquid network. And there are things that you do want to have in a solid network. It's called an archive. But there are also things that, you know, there's a lot of things that people think need to be archived. They probably should be thrown away as well. And it's a constant battle in my house is like, okay, do I really need this anymore? My uncle had a really wonderful saying, I'm sorry, it's kind of a rabbit hole, but he said he told me a few months years ago, he said, after you hit 65 for everything you buy, you should have to throw away two things. That way your kids stepped into a white liberal joke. That's a good loss to me. So, Tim or new dad, what do you think of all this? I mean, about all of these, including in certain 3D images into documents, or you mean, generally, all of this, but when it comes to that, I'd like to change the phrasing a little bit, not 3D images, but spatial structures. Because it's not necessarily a car engine, but it could also be philosophical flows and all kinds of things. Just want to make sure that the emphasis is on the relationships of this spatial thing, not of the 3D shapes necessarily. Well, for me, it seems that it optimizes the workflow that becomes almost obsolete as we speak. Because creating an image and the metadata and putting into documents that I'm sure that it will stay kind of usual work for us for people who have text, but it doesn't seem to be holding the line for the mainstream or something. At the moment, installing this new software to my open-claw agent on my glasses with AR. And with this small little, I don't know if you can see it, ring. So, and I think this is the basic interface for me these days. But it's much easier to do all this kind of stuff with AI agents, especially if you have some kind of persistent and evolving ones, where you can tell them to create new tools on the fly tools of this kind. And I think these kind of workflow and use cases, they will do it. They will push out traditional use cases. So, I'm sure that's it's so fun, but it seems to me that we are here talking about some use cases and workflows that are becoming obsolete with us altogether. We are also with this kind of workflows. But it may be just my opinion because I'm how you call it, too much beating on the AI drum. But my involvement into this kind of workflow tells me that it makes sense to work, for example, with generative interfaces. I've read a few articles and tried a few things on this. I'm sure you've tried this too, because these agents can generate interfaces like once in three minutes or whatever. So, it's basically not the interface you build that adapts to different users or documents, views or whatever. It's basically about the whole structure of workflow or even of cognitive flow that can create automatically interfaces on the fly. If it takes three minutes today and half a year, it will take three seconds. So, possibly we need to... Yeah, well, I think generative interfaces are interesting and all of that. By the way, I put in a link to a podcast, my wife recommended. It's really interesting on what happens when we stop reading. In order to have a generative interface, the system needs to know your needs and intentions. Right. Obviously, there still has to be some real design for when it should generate and in what way. You will have end of having an interface or just press a button like in that Jetson's. Of course, I'm not saying that there's no space for this kind of work at all for interfaces or cognitive design or how we call this kind of work these days. But I'm saying specifically about adding method data to the peer.co.png files and insertion them into old school documents and copying them on floppy disks or flash disks or whatever. The old document, old school, I can't believe you know. They're not old school documents. They are foundational ownership of knowledge things. Not someone's server far away that's got issues. Anyway, that's the PDF versus HTML debate we have for a few years there. Not the most useful discussion. I think architecturally there needs to be a layer where you can plug in your user interfaces. For example, frauds headset and two moors and glasses and each has different capabilities. So if you can unify your data model so that you can define common actions and interactions with your data, then you can get there. So just dreaming up the back end of what can support these spatial interfaces. And also the notion of time that these objects change over time. If you wanted to go do time travel and go back to previous versions, that should be available. Yeah, that's exactly the point Eric. So I love hearing about liquid systems. I mean, that's been my philosophy since 1991 liquid information. So of course I'm strong in support. And first time I met Doug after you know going through his stuff, I just gave a brief summary of my philosophy, which is interaction should go towards being liquid, but not fully. Because once it's fully liquid, there's no structure at all. So that doesn't go against what you're saying, Tom, when you're saying that you need to be able to freeze something to navigate around. So that's why the globe is such a great example to play with because it is an undisputable brown thing that we're all sitting on. It's hard to do liquid without some sort of rails. Yeah, I mean, even the oceans have coastlines, right? Yes, and it has layers and I thought it's actually so what is so exciting about the Atlas is we can keep adding stuff to it. How do we move that into our knowledge world? Right. So the 3D app that I built is called liquid information. So I hope you like the name Tom. And it has almost nothing in it. It is for us to decide what should go in it should it just take knowledge graphs that are traditional. Should we do something new should we optimize it for AI generated stuff from a query to show. It costs me very little to do that kind of work. The other stuff is cost me real money, but this cost almost nothing. I'm very happy to experiment. Also, interact list now supports multi user. So if you have a chance to put on an Apple vision Pro somewhere in the world call me and we'll go in and look at the globe together to see how that feels. I'm so looking forward to doing that. I'm going to say some more stuff with the expectation that someone will interrupt me. I'm going to talk to generate dialogue. In going through having had this opportunity to do by coding us on call it recently I've done too many apps and I've had to narrow down. And one thing that seems to me to be very, very core in knowledge work is our own to do and isn't this cool lists, which sounds mundane, but they seem to be very much a real thread through our own work. So I'm wondering if you have thoughts on that and not just you know what's opportunities and Doug Engelbart said or what you discovered in an analysis. There's also the you know, like Eric, I need more bookshelves. You know, that's an important part of our lives. We're having bookshelves built right now and looking behind you being reminded Eric. So how does that kind of stuff fit in this should it be outside of our knowledge work or is that really the structure of it. I like to more just to bring you on the spot again. You're a new dad. There will be amazing moments for you going forward. You will realize something from your child just looking at your child that is related to your understanding of the universe. Is that a trivial human thing or is that a core human thing that your knowledge environment should be allowed to be tied to. Well, I basically build a multi agent environment already with all kinds of intelligence of human development and knowledge development. So it's basically free of us, me, this agent network and child. And I build it in a way that it's not about cameras or registering the sounds. That's obvious. It's about the modeling of my own approaches and the picture of the world and how do I change myself and my relations. So it's like an an act of agents that supports my changes and changes in child and also it follows it. And so it's at the same time I suppose it will develop itself at the same time. I wouldn't call it knowledge like in Nanaka in the key which is approach like, I don't know, some kind of packed information or even actionable knowledge. It's something different. It's the whole stack between intelligence, and technologies and actions and world views and worlds and subjects and all kinds of different agencies at the same time. So if you are calling knowledge this kind of SM Blash, then it's about the knowledge, yes, if not. And I guess I'm not building virtual bookshelves for myself when I will become wise and wise when looking at my child. It's not about this kind of knowledge of information, something not liquid but fixated. It's about liquidity that flows between all kinds of subjectivity, agency understanding and relations between different agents. So this kind of thing I envision and I actually have that my part of work. So I have connected all different agents I have here. I mean like Alisa or Google Home and what I went into the network. So all this stuff will have ears and eyes. And also there's an open claw hard to it. But I build evolving with the evolution stuff. Basically it's an agent that writes its own prompts into a network of Google documents and at the same time it can rewrite them. So it writes its own system prompts all the time, like several times a second. So I get from chat, GPD and Claude, some red flags because they're writing and reading these documents all the time because they have this artificial personality that is multi-leared. So they have rules about writing, rules about rules, rules about rules and stuff like this. It's lots of fun. That's actually what I was going to say because my use cases they are around the documents that's basically whole, I don't know, lot of Google documents. But I've seen statistics, it's like yesterday they were written like about a thousand five hundred documents were edited and written and created and some of them deleted. And I think I read about three or four hundred pages. I don't know how many prompts I wrote but I think it's also a hundred pages or something like this. So it's another kind of text work. So and it's much easier to do with agent-generative interfaces like have different open windows for this kind of stuff instead of inserting something into the documents like you have shown us today. That's me coming back into old school text work. So I hope you do not hear this and this is not an offense of course. No, no, no. So a question for you then, I'm sure everybody would like to know as well. Very cool that how about the future? How do you want to consult this in the future? It's not about the future, it's about the present. I would sort of know that's what I'm doing and I'm actually half of my work is correcting all this stuff on different layers. For example I see some kind of psychofancy or I see some kind of memory problem that I bring out the ontology of memory. What is the memory? What is the imagination? What is the subjectivity and rewriting it, how I understand it. If I don't understand it and I read some additional books and then I take models out of books or out of my understanding and create some new blocks out of it. So it's not about the future because it seems like these days it's I wouldn't call stupid but it's very naive to predict future these days because it's happening so fast. So I suppose that there will be some kind of co-development or aligned development between different kind of subjects or essences. So it's not about the memory, it's not about the fixation, it's not about having the archive of all the sound or whatever. I'm movements that child has made, it's about actually colliving and co-understanding and forgetting is a part of memory by the way. So it's not retrieval and safe kind of memory, it's constructive memory like we have Freud explained this, how it works, how it's built in psychology. So based on that Timoran thank you both Tom and Heiner, based on your work. I guess this is quite tangential that also related. Do you have any thoughts or comments? I guess I'll have to jump in. No, I mean, I think the key is transparency. I think the key is for me, we are so used to humans putting their fingerprints on things that we don't recognize that as as being problematic. You know, one of the things I've always had to teach long before AI is that guess what, writers are biased. Anytime, if you're writing anything, you're presenting any kind of information as a photographer or writer or whatever, you're putting a frame around it. And you're saying, what I see or what I wrote is the right way to think about this particular object. And that does have value because you are transmitting yourself. But at the same time, that can also be abused. You know, somebody published mine comp, you know, and it made sense to a lot of people, unfortunately. And, you know, that's those two people who didn't look at the, you know, look at the alternative explanations for the same events that young eight off was describing. But the point I'm trying to make there is that the key here is transparency. You know, you want to be able to see the stack. I think this is a solution for algorithms too. I want to be able to look at Facebook or whatever and say, okay, this is why you're pushing me in this direction, or this is where this actually comes from. And that's hard to do, you know, it's hard to do in text messages. It's hard to do it emails. I mean, think about all the information you get there that supposedly, hey, this is a stock tip that will make you bazillion dollars or, hey, I'm a beautiful lady in your neighborhood and wants to, wants to have a good time. You know, and they tend to be, you know, pig butchering attacks and things like that. And you have, because you have no idea what's behind it. And so I, I don't, I don't need the latter and the, the former is, you know, if that were really that easy, there would be a lot more millionaires out there. But the, you know, the key there is, though, they, they depend on that lack of transparency. When you see a text message, you know, I, you don't know where it came from or what's behind it. When you see an email, same thing, unless you happen to know the sender and that provides you with a certain level of legitimacy because there's a level of transparency. I know that Frodo is not going to get me involved in a, in a, in an investment scam, or at least have a reasonable belief that that's true. But that's part of how we evaluate trust. And one of the, one of the problems, of course, was we atomized our, you know, connections. We're not sitting around a table in a room together. We, we aren't going home down the street in the, in the same neighborhood and you know where everybody lives. We're on different continents and we're in, you know, and this has, it brings with its own advantages. But trust is a real problem in that scenario. Good. I don't know if you're a bot. So the key, the solution to that problem is there were a few years ago is it's got to be transparent. It's, you know, you've got to have a way to see every all the different layers and to be able to disassemble them and say, OK, yeah. Frodo has added these parts to the photograph as an XF or whatever to the image. And I, I have a lot of respect for Frodo and his work and I realize he's not going to put crap in there. But, you know, this other thing was added by someone else who I have never idea, no idea who that is, right. And so maybe I'll take that with a little bit less legitimacy than I would say getting a, getting a comment, you know, getting that XF information from Frodo. And so, you know, you don't trust the AI is either for the same reason, because the AI is just an amalgamation of all of the bad opinions of the world. And, you know, put enough of those together and you might get a good opinion, but there's a good chance you're going to get crap too. But yeah, it's about transparency. It's about understanding all of the different layers of that and being able to just the normal person being able to disassemble that. I don't want to have to be a coder to sit there and go through the code and say, this is subroutine was inserted by a Russian hacker three years ago. That's, you know, that's not that's not something I, the normal person would be able to do. Thanks Tom, Hiner, do you have comments on this? I'm wondering if it most closer to your work. Well, I just want to say hello. I'm not met anyone of you beside Eric. I really looked a little bit into Tom into Frodo and I think this group is extraordinary. It's multimedia, it's multimodal, fully historical and authentic. I mean, I, my president was around Apollo domain and we looked into many, many fields, but we didn't introduce each other. I've been just an observer to this group. I was thrown in through Samhan and I think we have a common thing on augmenting not just the human, but the collective intelligence and include all the sentiments and the senses and whatever. I feel and mid seventies. I feel you are maybe younger than me, but I checked out Tom and how he really bridges like me, he's case proportions consequences. And my focus is more languages and cultures and belief systems. I would like to be in this group more often. Unfortunately, I am torn apart between various issues and obligations. Unfortunately, my English is not very good, but I am struggling with making meaning across scales and times and cultures and languages. And it looks like here is a very exceptional crowd and I'm now making a screen paint. Hello, Julia. I'm very grateful that you are here joining us and yes, all of us have different obligations and we can't always be here and two more work so hard that I have to remind him, you know, even when he's out with the baby stroller. It comes as you can, whenever you can, and that's just lovely. Thank you. As Tom says, thank you for your kind words. We are trying to expand the group to have different kinds of people in the group, which is extremely difficult because we care about very very specific things and not many people do. You know, that goes to our very very beginning point today or how we show something we're very proud of and people who are not really interested in the problem is like, okay, that's a computer thing. That's cool. Anyway, very glad you're here. And let's push a little bit more towards the whole spatialized knowledge thing. We have several directions we can go and having now spent real time looking at our planet solar system and nearby stars and the headsets. It's different for me to do that now because I made it I own it. I think that's a very important thing. When we make the information, we have a different relationship with it, right? I mean, I didn't make the solar system, but I made the app. So I have a different sense of agency and control over what it could be. Then if I step into Microsoft or Apple or whatever company's presentation. So what we're trying to do here with our various things, I think ownership is really, really important. That the user not only own their data and, you know, to more talked about, generative interactions. All of those things, if you go into an knowledge environment, then you can't do the stuff you want to do. What's the point, right? That leads to the question that my naive brain would say is binary and of course I'm wrong. But do we want to try to put our knowledge stuff, especially by taking on a specific coordinate system like time or the earth itself or should we leave it to be completely fluid and liquid. In which case, there is no order. So not all those two binary ones, they're not very good. Do we have a notion of putting on a headset and our own personal stuff we find interesting what we have learned, the questions we're looking at. What what should be an I'm looking at you Peter was echo what should be the ever movable stuff scaffolding is probably answered. What are your thoughts guys? How do you want to done? So in the previous call, you showed the big differ from different perspectives. And I think that's a very powerful metaphor that if we can show the same knowledge objects from different perspectives from different people's perspectives, different cultural perspectives, how different languages interpret words. I think there's value in that. So I'm going towards more like an open-ended knowledge sculpture where each of us can curate our own and then share them and interact with them together. Yeah, I'm very passionate about that vision Eric. I share it and you have been the only one to send these kind of Jason letters as tests. So I'm wondering. Okay, so one of the things I have to do because I said I would is build a call does not be useful, but a call way to go through proceedings for conference. I'm going to I've already built something. And part of the notion is the half text conference that September, once you get the PDF suit down or them one by one, put it in this up, put your headset on and you can do cool things with it, right. That's fine. But what Eric's talking about is more interesting because imagine during a conference or during one of our calls here, you want to add to this annotated tagging of the hunter, please go on. Well, Eric was saying just was ringing a bell. It is my life since 36 years. So how to really bridge scales, proportions, consequences, but mindsets. I was a metadata base expert to speak your technical ontology and programming language. I was a metadata base expert in the UNG seven OECD project in the late 80s. Can you believe that we had a mandate with you. The only thing that I did was to make a data base for the UNG seven OECD to harmonize information, not a standardized compatibility, but comparability, harmonizing information. Because this will do years and economists and whatever kind of people, but I was this thrown into the pond of sharks, metadata base experts and the little work on that, what you are picking up here now. I mean, I don't want to see senior or junior or whatever, but I feel we have a common thread there. And this cognitive extension of use of space and putting alpha numerics into context is something where this group, where I started to come. And finally, Tom in detail is really extraordinary, extraordinary. And for all the bringing it across the scales, I called it micro mazo macro or local regional global. We called it later glocker, but nobody understood us. It's something like a very special group. And maybe we find a time for a very short session or I sent you some videos. I'm presently struggling with Bart and all Gemini with notebook on how to make the incomputural imaginary and impossible real. It reminds me of something and I'm grateful. Writing something in our comments there. Timor, please go on. I was just thinking about one experiment. I wrote an article. I read an article about it was about elephants and trying to measure elephants IQ. I do not use ape build IQ attest to measure intelligence of an elephant because he is basic world view is not objects in space, but it's called it as all factory. I mean, how you call it. The different senses, the vibrations and things he smell and this space and time is called a different for elephants. So they re-structured IQ experiments and found that intelligence of elephants builds not like it's built in apes. It's like can't set basic to categories at time and space, but he also said that's it's so for humans. And the artist, as I remember his writings, he said that we can basically rewrite the internal instruments that were built by evolution. And I think it's not about only cultural evolution, like special locations and placing knowledge in space because we are as apes. I mean, like it's higher apes, Katarini and Homo as a descendant of Katarini, a family. We know how to navigate in space and memory works good with space because we have an object and attribute in space and time. The question is how much human instruments we are going to use? Don't we want to try something else? Probably go beyond the human unbuilt and try instruments that move us into different kinds of cognition and to different kinds of instrument building. That's so important to me, and I'm going to for a moment go almost the opposite to really help make your points. Have a look at this guys. So this is a table and author to all work process of a table, right? But here's the thing when I had programmers before this to have a good table and author was actually really hard to implement Apple almost fought us against it API wise, right? But the reason I bring it up now, while we were chatting earlier, I copied something cross and when you copy from the markdown file, it doesn't render as an active table. So I asked Claude to do that in a built in author a way to parse markdown and present it as a real table. Right? That is incredibly sophisticated stuff. Why am I showing that now partly because it got done right before Timor was talking, but also almost anything that we can think with just text because Timor was talking much wider and Hiner was also talking much wider. We can pardon my French, we can bloody well do now. Right, but the magic we can build on when you paste something do this craziness to it when you copy this do this craziness to it, there's almost no limit. So even though this is the future of text lab. Yes, we should look at elephants and vibrations. Yes, we should look at completely different ways because the whole point is to increase empathy, understanding communication and have a better understanding. We should have a better rock going through the space to live on right that's why we're doing this right. We're living in a time of absolute with all respect of magic. Peter. The other thing is a lot about metadata and tag systems and all of our different apps and they all basically just give you one bucket of tags. And in a lot of them, they'll even go automatically alphabetize the tags, which can be incredibly irritating if you're encoding semantics in the order that you apply the tags to the item. So lots of times I'll basically like build sentences with tags that I'm in an app that keeps the tags in the order that I attach them unless I manually drag them around to reposition them. But then one of the apps I was using suddenly like switch to automatically alphabetizing the tags. So suddenly I lost the ability to have that level of encoding because suddenly everything was just going to throw all the tags in an alphabetical sort for me, destroying the whole point of leveraging the tag system that way. So maybe what we need are multiple name tag sets instead of just raw tag that everybody just defaults to both raw tags in that's easiest high level thing. But now with the tools, it might be easier to add that secondary level of abstraction. Yeah, we definitely need more ways to do to deal with that, so sure. And tags are of course one valuable way to deal with our knowledge. I mean, Dini with Sloan, the work we were doing Peter. And she talked a lot about annotation and her annotation was a bit different. She's in the humanities. You basically write in another document, but the way we do you all have the same feeling when you're reading a paper walker document the way you can scraggly line underline something rather than the light underlying has semantic meaning for you. So how we choose to tag something whether it's on a physical thing or digitally, it is woefully underrepresented in terms of opportunities. But come on guys, we don't have that many minutes to more talk about elephants, where else can we go? What can that star in our minds? Trigger's for me the idea elephants never forget, but I was looking at a book and it has all these dead links book by Ted Nelson did links from the 1990s. So why are we forgetting? I think there's an issue with AI models having to forget. I mean, you end up with this perpetual accretion and the way you forget with a model you start with a clear context. So it's not a complex and hopefully it won't apply invalid data, given your context, given the way that the tokens match up. But eventually, you know, a model from 10 years ago, 10 years from now, will let have a lot of AI slop in it. Well, I have a lot of good stuff. What kind of responses you get out of it? And how could you validate it? But how do you forget is going to be a problem because now everything's been encoded, which like the matrix everything's frozen in 1990 or everything's frozen in 2022 or whatever. And our knowledge base. As we grow it's going to get a lot more sloppy humans and AI. It's already sloppy. It's always been sloppy. It's just the slop rate of slop increases. D slop every X DT ever since we took the, and this is not a bad. This is not a good thing necessarily. But ever since we took the filters off of you have to publish it and put it in the library for anybody to pay attention to it. That that is was it was it reduced the gatekeepers. So, you know, I firmly believe that all of the movements that we've had come out of the woodwork in the last decade have always been there. But they had no voice because in the internet gave them voice in a way that was impossible before because the editors would ignore the book about LGBTQ plus or whatever. Because they could, you know, it's a very small percentage of the population. And so, or, you know, Black Lives Matter or pick your group, right. But at the same time when you do that, you of course open up the door to sloppiness, you know. Again, my mind come reference, he still had to find a publisher. And nowadays I could write mine and come and put it up there and it would just be my reputation on the line, right. I'm not going to do that. By the way, just so I'm clear on that. I was thinking about elephants earlier. So, when we were talking about elephants, elephants have this like some of the cool things we've learned about them recently. If they're able to apply symbolic clinking in other words they give they're able to give each other unique names. So, I guess I think. These are, these are signs and symbols that are derived from life that, and when we were built, when we do knowledge work, you know, that, that life link to like the symbols that we use. It needs to be maintained. I think a lot of our, you know, a lot of our problems these days seem to be derived from the way that we trade on signs that seem to be totally removed from materiality. So, I think that's the relationship between Tesla and T SLA as an example here. So, I guess my question is like if we're going to start in like taking in this like, you know, knowledge work from agents. It's going to be, we need to figure out how to like create guardrails. So, I think that means are, you know, you know, are still linked to relations. There's a second thought there about just trail off my mind in a couple of places. I was just totally confused. This was not just the voice of fraud, but it was fully resonating and ringing with it because my favorite thing is the Mahmuth and the elephant. And all the stories about the Indians and whatever it means around multiple intelligence. This is really an extraordinary group. And I really wonder. So, if we lose you there for a second. That's you reconnect with audio. So, Tim, this is one of the few stuffed animals that remains from my childhood happens to be an elephant. And I think that's the only thing that I can do. The question is like what morphologies give rise to symbolic thinking. And how do we how do we integrate those will also like. I think very much ones are just like removing that relation, that recentality like that derived of being in the world. I was just listening to this. I am a discussion on body art. Yes, these are all constructed realities. There is a very popular at least in Russia book. It's called how the forest. I think by Eduardo con. It's it had three editions during one year. It's traditional anthropology or non human anthropology. It's the very the castor line. If you know it's about how to how pierces pierce semiotics. I applied to involvement of different species in jungle around. Presley or somewhere so it's multi species cognition book. So when I was talking about elephants, elephants were just an example of some pattern of cognition. And the question was, do we plan and create projects for human or ape based cognition with objects that we grasp and place in space in time. Or do we actually embrace and good arts. I think that was definitely pointing. I think somewhere beyond. I would place my bet on this sector that goes beyond cognition that we were put into by evolution. I think we can do more. It's not about just smells of vibration or whatever or ultrasound. I don't know affordances pick up. I think that's not about unvelts that are different for different species. It's about space that's been folded into different cognitions and then been folded by this cognitions into different instruments packs. So that's about development of. Ideation and understanding and relations not about like just new instruments for ape might. So please, my hypothesis of what we are doing here. I don't know if I'm right. Thank you both and the hunter back to you. Okay, so I speak up team or really. I'm going to ask you guys very specific question. Let's say we are wildly successful in our theories, practice and systems that we make. What is the problem we want to solve? What is the goal states? What is the end state we would like to achieve? It can be poetic. It can be engineering wise. It can be whatever the heck you want. Eric starting with you because you're my top left. Okay. I have been inspired by Ted Nelson's ideas of docuverse, Xanadoos, Xeg. And I think there's something valuable in that structuring of knowledge that can have value to the world. It's implemented in a way that's that obvious easy to use. If we can handle all the mechanics on the back end and have a nice spatial view of structures where it's really practical for people to start building their knowledge sculptures. That's very nice. I think there are two things I get off this conversation. Just riffing on it is what we're going to try to do with it. I mean, right now, are we trying to recreate the eight mind without the eight. The environment is missing from these AIs and we're doing something entirely new. It's a new environment that they live in and it's going to go in different directions. Merge of behavior will be different than humans on Savannah's hunting and stuff. So be interested to see what the intelligence happens. But we're kind of. What do you want to get out of that? There's the idea of having the knowledge sculptures and sharing our knowledge sculptures. It gets to be kind of hippie, hippie kind of stuff like some second life universe where we're going to have a VR thing and walk around and see each other. It will be in real life. We'll do it together. You know how how all that works out. But I think the problem is going to be is the same thing with every other kind of stuff from nuclear power and weapons and whatnot is we've got our stick and we're going to poke it at things. So we got the other. Our our our feral side. And our intellectual side keep it at odds. I think we'll be assuming we stick around. I think we will. I think we'll navigate through it just as we muddle through everything else. But you know we're going to have all these problems to solve and I think. The kind of things we're doing here to visualize relationships is going to be interesting so that our intuition can interoperate with all the things that AI is going to do that's going to be kind of alien but useful. And it's it's there. They're different things you treat them as entities and you think they're like intelligence and age AI and singularity kind of stuff. Or if they're just useful tools that happen to be more sophisticated than we think. Then we thought they could be this simple techniques they're doing are. It's amazing things work as well as they do it's amazing the dog is talking at all. Quite frankly, I mean. If you if you cease to be amazed by that I think there's an issue you got to watch out for. We start fooling ourselves. It's amazing that I can get on an airplane and and come visit you in a few hours Peter. I mean, you think about it in the context right. I mean, so we're going to do similar things with this technology in terms of transmuting ideas to each other. Good ideas and bad ideas you know ideologies and and awful things as well. You know, hang on to what the point you made the future before we move on by the way, Tom here next. And is when I went to search use work Peter or Basil Coles went we had a professor who said truth kills creativity. I've been able to find out what was have done research every couple of years. What he meant by that is one something is true. You know, you don't know for alternatives, but what it could be. Right. And AI presents information as truth. That's why I want to keep it away from my son. Except for the most basic things. What Timora's building is a continuous what the fuck is sorry what the heck is this machine if I make over simplify rights. The notion of truth. I mean, if you look at certain political movements, let's not name any of them. But once they become really obsessed with the label that they are under that becomes their truth rights. And so that's why I think that the way you're building has to help us and others continuously reevaluate that. So Peter, thank you for for sparking that. Tom, over you. What do you want out of this? Well, I mean, I. I come from I mean, I am a self admitted constructivist postmodernist in a sense that I don't believe in truth. That is a very very very important thing. And that depending on who you are and you know, where you are, your truths can be very different. The link I put in there in the in the chat is to Benedict Anderson's Imagine Communities, which is kind of the classic in this area. But, you know, this is a negotiated process. I mean, what we're doing right now is a negotiated process. And we're going to find the finding terms that we don't have words for. We're arguing about what words mean. We're defining within the context of this group what we think is a truth. Of course, one of the problems is that we can't ever seem to come to a no one's here to smack us over the head and said, OK, we're going to take Eric's version of the truth. And that's it. And which is a good thing. As you said, the truth, you know, truth kills creativity. To me, part of the trick with using AI is, is that I think one of the reasons that I find it so useful is that I don't have never accepted it as truth. And I've always looked at it as a way of getting it multiple truths. And that's the problem with our education systems these days is because we, you know, there's a truth that's in the textbook and the answers are in the back. And we all know that's that's bogus. And, and that kills creativity right there. That's that is exactly why our education systems have broken. So, to me, it's about understanding other people's truths is the most important thing. I think that we can get out of these tools. Because I'm always fascinated by, I don't understand what's going on in other people's brains most of the time. That may be me. But I'm fascinated by trying to get inside other people's heads, especially creative people. You know, one of my favorite kind of documentaries to watch is documentaries about how creative people do creative process, you know, how they work through problems. Where did where did Frank's app get these ideas for his music or, or, what's that one called about 10 years ago, but, Tim's for me, for me, is an amazing film too, because it's all about he's trying to discover a truth that's been hidden. And the process at which the mechanical process, you know, the creative process, he has to go through in order to build a machine that basically does what Vermeer did. Is is is really interesting, you know, and so he is trying to dig into what the, you know, underlying truth is. I can't say definitively at the end of the end of the movie that this is exactly what Vermeer did, but man, the clues are there. So yeah, exactly. And that's the problem with AI actually is it's a rabbit hole maker. And I think I commented on this when I wrote my paper for the symposium last year, is that I thought, you know, I'm going to use the AI to help me with research that'll save me all this time. And it did the opposite because it opened up all of these cans of worms that I'm like, oh yeah, you should include this. Oh, you should include that. And I'm like, I'm frames that I should stick to under 4000 words if I go into this whole subject area, then there's no way at hell of keeping this under 4000 words. You know, and that's that's where we have to come in as curators and editors. You know, that's the human element again. But we're also putting our finger on the skill and we do that. just briefly, Peter Demetris, you wrote here, A, I didn't kill creativity, just exposed to the little we had. We all know the angle of our statement of somebody said, they just did dreamer. Dreaming is hard work. Creativity and dreaming is very hard work. So thank you for that. Peter, we'll go. So go go. Okay, I'd like us to get away from the, there's an app for that. Super focused tool models and get back to general tools to see more of the emphasis come back to people as individuals instead of just, you know, we're just going out consuming content now instead of creating content and we're dependent upon someone again building a custom tool for every single purpose. I want to get back to Doug's world with an open-ended infrastructure with lots of rich functionality that can be combined in interesting ways. Brief and very to the point and I fully agree. That's why I think the substrate is so important. Metadata is so important. So 100% now there's just two more in Astral. So Astral, you're next if you don't mind. What? Would you mind reinstating your questions? Yeah, the question is, it's very easy to get kind of wound up in the cool tools in philosophical aspects. But in a deep way, what the heck do we want out of this? If we manage to build through theory or implementation that whatever, what problem are we solving? Are we making a foster computer or better thinking thing or whatever it might be? I wonder what your perspective is, what's your dream is? So I would like to have a tool, a system that allows us to identify resources, gather resources and give us agency in our material world to deploy them in ways that allow us to pursue positive self discovery for our people, for ourselves, for each other. And we need to have ecological constraints so we recognize how those tools are applied and are affecting our world. The knowledge that we're building together, I'm trailing off because I didn't mean to use that word. Let's say, just the context that we build needs to be linked. I'm looking for an aggregator. I'm looking for something that gives me the reference to the stuff that matters to me in my environment and also gives the resources that you can use towards your dreams right now. And these are repercussions that maybe we can perceive basically implementation of these dreams. Lovely. Thank you. Also, by the way, as always, if in between sessions, you have anything you want to add to the record, just email me or whatever. I'll be very, very happy to put it on the page. And it may even make it into our song. Timor, what do you try to make with all these things? You're building a lot. So I'm wondering, do you even have a clear vision or are you very much experimenting and lighting the torch as you go? I'm experimenting, but I think for this question, it was actually, I haven't been thinking about this for a long time, but now it's a good time to ask this question. I would say something like this. You know, Henri Buxon, the philosopher, he told the ones that we, as people with the rational mind, are disconnected from the vital flow because rationality, it makes time and space into different objects and time moments. So we are lonely because we are not connected to the life flow. So, and I think that's this kind of work with interfaces can be the tool to bring about this loneliness because before that we had only lobotomy or something like this is a way to return back to not mind, but I think we can use this knowledge work to transuse the limits of the knowledge of somehow, of rationality and come back to this connection and actually see that we were never alone because there are lots of intelligence in everything, in animals, in nature, everything. And it's this sense of disconnection and separateness can be brought down with if we are dreaming because it's not about composing texts or even communicating some ideas from one separate entity to another. I think there's some bigger stuff behind this. So it's about this returning connection to the deep and to the flow and basically to the real time, the lifetime, vital time and vital space, but through some kind of knowledge work. I think because this liquidity and flow, it basically changes this situation with different ideas and different symbols that are separated from each other, written down and they break the world into a broken space of semantics. I think this liquidity goes along and some of these liquidity uses agents to move and to make this texture alive. I think we can go back to this pre-human mind state of understanding the world, but still being able to think and being able to communicate and think it's some kind of... So I really believe that if we work into this vector that is shown also by Engelbert, what you are doing, then we can actually one day understand that we were never allowed, really. That's it. Very, very cool and interesting and question. First of all, Timor, this right then, philosopher's name, I didn't really catch it. But in listening to all this, first of relatively superficial trivial question, have you all tried Persian food like Persian, Grills and Persian salads? Probably, probably, if not, not big deal, but the thing is, I'm wondering if what we really underlying all of this, we're building something to counter strongmen, usually men, not always. I mean, to me, as in Russia, I bold close friend, Putin is an absolute something or other. Other political leaders, not too brilliant these days, the technological trillionaires, not altogether the best people in the world, here we are. Of course, we all have a lot in common, but we are trying to get to point where we can have a passionate disagreement, argument grow and get somewhere. But what we, as a planet right now, what we're really struggling against is a few people with an inordinate amount of communication power, so this financial power. So maybe what we're trying to build in a way is a way for people to think and connect collectively in a way that has real effects. Right now, what we're doing may be interesting for people in 100 years as an archival meeting, but we haven't really gotten to the point of change in the world yet, then all, that in my experience, people who are very strongly of this in that opinion, it doesn't take that much to sway them. Right, they need to meet someone up the opposing opinion and first of all, this is a human. Secondly, if it's a cultural thing, have dinner. Their food probably tastes really nice, whatever it is. And then when there is a discourse and a disagreement to have it in an environment where they feel safe, we talked about that a lot. And one of the magical things about text, of course, is a lot of your personality is left behind when you write, which can be very empowering and it can also be horrible when people write horrible things online. But if we don't manage to get back to the basic humans, and we just have these few megalomaniac people throwing the planet off balance, we may have a problem, astral, please. Astral, are you available? Oh, my check. I'm here. Okay. So I was just thinking about that. I think the feedback about how we were talking earlier about how interfaces could be generated. I think feedback from how we feel our systems are working as we are in them, maybe the most crucial feedback point that we can try to build our systems to collect. Like people are not going to be able to read the technical details, but they can tell you if the weather feels nice. And this kind of like feedback, I think, with the right framework, may allow us to help build systems that free frame around how people that are actually exhibiting or actually can have feedback about how our systems work. Can I have agency? There's a bit of a word salad, but I think I got it out there. I think that's very related to what you're talking about, Tom, right? Yeah, I mean, again, these are, these are the relationships are constructed, and we have different, we bring baggage with us. And the toughest thing is to get rid of our baggage enough so that we can obtain that other perspective. And that's really tough. I've spent a lot of time going all the way back to my political science days. The very first scholarly article I ever had published was on ethno-nationalism, and how elites within those societies construct the reality of the people who, you know, this was during the Yugoslavian Wars. That how the elites construct these mythologies within societies and how they go about doing that and how that influences very negative outcomes in many cases. And we've seen already, I mean, in the last decade, how this has shifted in so many different countries, not just the United States, of what we find is acceptable democratic behavior, so to speak. And that is a conversation that is an elite-driven thing that the conversation or the low-ack of one, that is driving that, you know. And so that's the thing where, I think, technology offers a very disruptive capability. We just have to be willing to grasp it. The one thing I think is the big failure from the early days of the internet is that we thought that's what the internet was already going to do. And it does for those of us who know how to look at it, but for the vast majority of people, it doesn't seem to have made a difference, or it's made it worse, because the amount of information out there is just no further. I don't have time to read every article on Wikipedia. I don't have, you know, so I'm just going to do what, you know, Trump, reputant, or whoever says, and, you know, they know better than I do. Right? So that's the biggest problem in the world today. That we refuse to construct our own narratives. Well, you know, it's interesting. You should say that particular point. And, and by the way, if you guys are okay, we'll go off-posterized. And we have a two-hour session, just two brilliant. Of course, you can eat to leave early. That's, of course, okay. But I do honestly believe we need more religion. I know it's an extremely unpopular thing to say, especially in our generalized kind of situations. But if you look back at the founders of the, all the major current religions, what does it come down to? What's what's in you? What's in what's in Muslim? What's a Christian? You know, if you look at the origin, it's someone who says, be nice to other people. And find out what that means. That's what they say. Right? There's been a lot of crud and little people putting stuff on top of it. The reason I say it, Edward O. Wilson also wrote a book that's a letter to a person. A book that's a letter to a preacher or a pastor, whatever it was called, saying, if you don't care about the climates, if you'd believe in a God, why are you disrespecting the God's creation? Right? And I'm not saying we should all start talking about some kind of a God in this community, not at all. But we cannot engineer our way out of these problems that we have in the humanity situation. We have to be something related to our feelings and our spirits. I know I'm, again, preaching to the choir. This is nothing new to you guys. But I am wondering how we can help with these tool things we're building to get closer to that. Eric, please comment on that. And then I may have something else to show you guys. So I'd like to relate what you just said to something from last week where there was discussion about bad actors in a community and where the community devolved. And it was all about leaderboards and weapons. So now I'd want to contrast that with a community from the 1990s, which was a multi-user dungeon that was used in schools. And it taught kids how to write, how to build their own worlds. And it was new, exciting. And what was so special about that was there were rules established up front that this was going to be a non-violent place. And that the kids would be mentored and helped, and yet the people who would moderate it. So that's like a covenant form of community that was established. And so I say that if communities can agree on the rules and build in that way, then you'll have these pockets developing around the world. And it's really at a local level where it matters. The more that people can get together locally and solve their own problems regardless of what they're living under. That's my vision. I mean, part of the, yeah, so agree with you. I mean, part of the problem is I used to be one of these people saying, you know, we shouldn't buy aircraft cars. We should have more schools. But now the reality of the world is we kind of need both. That's awful. Right? That is awful. And one of my closest friends of nonsense childhood, who went to the military and worked in intelligence, has shown some of the geopolitical stuff about countries that are not relevant to us in our discussion, but other countries what is actually going on. Because of this stupid leaders on top where their ego is in crap, right? So how do we give the citizenry better access to information and communication? And how can we get closer? And D and D Tom, thank you. Please read that out. And then, Astro, I think you're about to say something. Please say after Tom. The D and D is all about constructing realities. That's why so many tech kind of videos played D and D in their use. I will say that what you're talking about is deeply threatening to the systems that exist out there. At a whole bunch of different levels. I mean, I deal with this at an educational institutional level. And messing with their reality is. And I'm not going to be a bit dangerous to say the least. I don't think dangerous is the right word because frankly, it's not going to get me shot, but it could get me ostracized and into a certain extent it has. And the one thing I have at this point is I really don't care. Because I'm like, I'm going to do my thing and, you know, I'm not going to play your stupid politics, but this is a, this is a problem across education. I'm not going to play politics. You know, these are deeply entrenched systems. And I encourage people to read up on systems theory. On like, Dinele Meadows, designing in systems is one of the classics. There are many others. And because the problem, you know, we think this is all great. And in the safe zone of this meeting. And I think we can explore these ideas, you know, very freely, because we're not threatened by them. But when we start pushing it to the rest of the world, you have to be very strategic when you're, when you're, and recognize the systemic reactions that happen. And so, because they will shut you down. Right. And speaking of someone who lost, I lost my, I lost so many people to cancer. And I think that's innovation in the beginning is very much like a cancer. There isn't a lot of people actively want to shut you down, but systemic. If it doesn't go with the system, it is seen as a cancer. Right. Until the cancer is useful, then it becomes another limb. An extension, then it's accepted, right. We are now in the horrible stage and the difficult stage of trying to do things that are seen by the systems as being that most horrible, awful thing. So our job is exactly what you say, Tom. We have to provide something useful, demonstrably useful. Only way, but we also have to, we also have to close it in a way that looks like. They're doing, it's doing what they're already doing. So what I'm building right now, for instance, is this reasoning loop idea you can basically elevate people's levels of thinking through a recursive method using AI. To get them to a point where they're willing to accept alternate realities, to create them themselves and so on and so forth, which is something education has done a lousy job of over the years. And, but it claims to do it, especially higher education. We teach critical thinking. Well, okay, you can believe what you want, but I'm going to show you how to teach critical thinking. And if you don't like it, you tell me why this isn't, you know, doing exactly what you say. And that's the really, really the key is to use their own systemic philosophies against them. So if we're talking about the free and open flow of information, well, there are some societies where that's considered very dangerous. But there are other societies where it's considered an ideal. And so how do you lean into that in such a way that people can't argue against it without looking completely hypocritical? Well, so that is a really important question because free, the word free has so many meanings, obviously. And information cannot exist by itself. Information only exists in context. So if we're talking about what we probably need this free and free flow information is information needs to come through some kind of cultural context, like you talked about my comp earlier. It's nothing wrong with people reading my comfort. They should bloody well know what it's all about where it comes from in its history. It's not an instruction guide. It's a warning, right? I don't think that's an unfair thing to say. Then of course, someone over different philosophy might say the opposite of what I just said. And a lot of the benefit of having the editorialized media that I'm curated, we talked about earlier is choosing our sources, of course. I'm running a thing in the background here to show you guys. I hope it'll be finished before we run out of time. How can we mess with people's contexts without threatening them? I mean, if there is a really good. One of my favorite developers is a Hideo Kojima and he's been producing media that is really like it's meant to like shape your in your perception of your environment. But he does it from a perspective like if you tell someone they're going to learn a lesson from the game, they won't learn it. And it's that if you want to talk tactics, that's a part of it. So it's about like giving people the lessons that they construct from their environment for themselves and own it themselves. Yeah, one of the most interesting applications of second life back in the day that I ever saw was that someone in constructed a an environment where you were essentially. You had to you were shown from the perspective of schizophrenic what the world looks like. And it was immersive and you know you were schizophrenic without actually having to go through all of the other problems that we get schizophrenic, but you understood it in a way that is impossible to understand at a distance. You know you can read all about all day long in a textbook, but until you live it, it's really hard for you to adapt to that kind of that that reality. I think there's real possibilities, particularly with AI and I mean with XR to exactly, you know, what's it like to go through life is something that you're not. I think a question that I have is like how do you get people to start thinking about playing like a child does again, like for as another context we have kids. And I think a lot of the children here. Well, you can have like you know if you start using curse words in your household, the kids start thinking structurally around like why does words exist and start using them themselves. I need to show you this. Dave Miller, who most of you have been introduced to a friend also my professor when I got my PhD, a brilliant guy. The AI to be able to use the virtual space like a human. This is not that, but it's related. So if I click on the AI button, you can type in any kind of a request. Here's some pretty, pretty done ones. So I'm going to just do this. So now it interprets the request goes online. And here we have results in 3D. Whether 3D is relevant or not, I don't know. It was the same time to some you can do this kind of stuff. But let's add another one. Tokyo temperature and the Nikkei. Here's this. Anybody have it at the type of data you would like to see. Any kind of data in the world that can be quantitative. Tell me let's do it. Let's see if it functions in density of some magnetic field. How many inches of rainfall in the last 24 hours? Okay, hang on. So all our magnetic activity. Over the last two years. That's a big one. So let's see. Is it raining a lot in New York theater? We had heavy rain yesterday. Now it just looks like it's ready to rain any second, but it seems to be holding off. Okay, so for some reason I couldn't do that. This is the whole planet. I was built while we were talking to us now. That's the point of it. And here is the fronts. How about something like a number of computers per person? I don't think I got it because I said I'm going to demo it to you guys. I want to show you what I wrote. I said. Tell me a range of questions can ask you made text entry dialogue. So I can do it demo front of the lab right now. So it says demo. Let me do three things fast. One, put tapable example questions right in the dialogue. Two, smoke test the fixtures on the device before you do it live in front of people and three launch the app. This was done over 10 minutes. Right. That's kind of the main point here. So crazy, right? Of course, this runs now equally well on iOS and in that sense. You can overlay them. You can walk through them. Can we delete things? Yeah, we can, but I delete to the wrong. Oh, it even has persistent undo how cool is that. Anyway, I just wanted to open that up as an a non effortful thing for help or a spatial thinking. And astral gamification is it recording? Not gamification. No, no, no, exactly. Gamification is something I'm not a big fan of. You do this and you get points. And I think that's what that was what I was going to highlight what you're talking about is experiences, which is much more interesting and much deeper and gets you made more interesting. Yeah, we need to separate play from game and like so many were talking about. I'm serious play design is kind of the framework I'm working from. And then we construct games from the way we play and that those games then become cutified, but. Games have a funny capacity to create abstract tokens that really mean nothing except for collecting more tokens and, you know, that that's a bad loop to be under. Yeah, that's not a construction. You're just you're living with someone else's construction. And I would agree that the. I don't I honestly don't like the term serious games because it implies not fun. I think that you know, again, D&D being an example of a game where it's it's it's it is a serious game, but it doesn't look like one. And I think building things constructing things all the time and I think with video games as well. You know, anything that is open ended that allows you to construct your environment is is really interesting. I mean, that's why Minecraft is what it is. You know, Minecraft is a good example of that. A great book came out recently about constructing play for international relations out of King's College called politics of play by Andy Hurst. I I I've been just pouring through the references of it because it's filled with a lot of good stuff. By the way, guys, and closing you should say what I'm doing because it's just right up what we're doing up for what to share screen. But so this is a normal author documents. At the view just saw I exported it as a PNG so it's on the desktop I dragged it in. And now I'm going to obviously save it going to export it as an EPUB not setting anything specific but on the desktop. So first of all in here I should now be able to. Yeah, that does that. Okay, there's this up that you posted. Let's not okay. So here we go. This is a normal flat EPUB just to verify not that you don't believe me or anything. Sorry, I'm trying to do something else. Open it in the apples. So here it is. That's all there's in there. It's not very exciting. When you view it there, but if you view it in the knowledge space, you click on it. Open source. Yeah, it didn't fully work. That's the plumbing that I'm working on to have it be able to then open up the 3D so you don't just have this static graph thing you can interact with it. I'll make it work by Monday. Have a great week everybody. Good session. Thank you everyone. Thank you. If you just cost me money because now I've got to read that book too. This is one of the more expensive meetings I go to because I'm all I can have a stack of books that I've got over the years with this. Very lucky Mark Anderson is not here. You know what's asking your book ever very mean. Oh yeah, I know I've gotten a few off of Mark over the years. So I would love to have a discussion about it. Yeah, look forward to it. I mean, so I got to read it too. Bye.