Kind: captions
Language: en
Okay, let's start. Yeah. So, Peter, what
have you been doing headset wise
recently?
&gt;&gt; Uh, not too much. Mostly I've been
focusing on underlying data and logic
models
and not worrying about the actual
visualization.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I think that's if I say it
correctly is quite aligned with the way
Mark is looking at it. He's not
according to some text messages that
excited about writing in XR. But then
again, I don't think we were looking at
writing. We're looking at thinking.
And that becomes a different thing. And
I absolutely love your background. It's
so relevant to this.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I wish I could visit that library
in person one day.
&gt;&gt; Is it a real library? Oh, it is, isn't
it?
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Where is it?
&gt;&gt; Dublin.
&gt;&gt; Oh. Oh, is that why it's getting bigger
and bigger? It's Dublin and Dublin.
Sorry, that's the worst dad joke ever.
Well, you should come to Europe someday
for sure. It's not that far away from uh
from here obviously.
But what feelings do you have about what
might become more useful in the headset
other than kind of multiple monitor
setup in addition to that? I mean,
&gt;&gt; well, I still want to try for the
Benedicting cyerspace idea of having a
really abstract data space where you get
to control the dimensions and how
data objects are arranged dimensions and
then unfolding the dimensions to expose
inner levels for highdimensional
entities.
I'm going to send you a link to
something.
Um,
I I think you are just like me, partly
inspired by this.
&gt;&gt; Ah, yes.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
It's It's kind of um kind of wild, kind
of cool.
But how tell me more about how you're
thinking about this because
uh one thing that became very clear to
me uh over the last few years when we
were talking about um non-ucuk uklidian
spaces and all kinds of things like
that.
Um
we still have two eyes or one eye you
know it it doesn't go inside our brain.
This is very obvious for those who get
it. For me, it was news when we started
experimenting with it. When you're
talking about these um special spaces,
Peter, how do you envision that they
will appear and how should we interact
with them? Have your thoughts on that
yet?
&gt;&gt; Um
I view the spaces as being cubes with
the back wall, the side wall, and a
floor wall. uh the other faces
being clear and points arranged within
that space. Um
selecting a point there and then
unfolding it which means having another
cube that represents
the point in the first cube
exposing three new dimensions. And
actually you can get a little bit more
because you can also color code the
points or you could slightly modify the
shape of the points.
But you so you are still looking at
walls.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Are you do you primarily consider when
you're thinking about this kind of
sitting down or standing up and not
walking and being in a fully rendered
environment or are you thinking about
AR, you know, seeing things in your
physical environment?
I tend not to think about AR simply
because I have too many bookcases around
me and there's not enough space in the
compact space that I'm working in the
real world to be arranging stuff in AR.
So
I'm thinking more sit down in the
absence of an omniirectional treadmill.
If we had some sort of an omniirectional
treadmill mechanism so that I could walk
without actually walking more than a
couple feet horizontally,
then I'd be interested in other
arrangements. But given the fact that
currently we have a headset for our
head, but we don't have something for
the lower half of our body to
accommodate moving around, uh, I see
that as being the primary constraint at
the moment.
Yeah, I think this is a very important
discussion because um you know Deie
wanted to be in an environment where
she's sitting on a um a chair that
swivels a swivel chair
so that you could be able to have
information on all sides and we also
&gt;&gt; Yes, that definitely works for me.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And we also looked at um
sculpting things in front of you. I I
like those approaches and I'm very glad
we went through them. The reason I'm
currently focused on AR is twofold. Uh,
one of them is the the brain uses
spatial information when we physically
move through space. You know, the memory
palace that you talked about, of course,
and also um
we
we can then
if we're only in a virtual environment,
we we don't get to do that. We don't get
to I don't know. There was two reasons.
Hang on. I have them in my slides.
It was like a point to make today.
Goodness gracious me.
Anyway, um yeah, we um Okay, I'll I'll
do I'll do a slideshow for you guys.
This there's not a lot of slides.
Um but so we can do that.
Uh, Peter D, are you there?
&gt;&gt; I'm here. I'm just I'm on my computer
and my phone.
&gt;&gt; No, that's cool. It's just um if you see
it, then I'll just go through a few
slides.
&gt;&gt; Um, can you
highlight what you put in the chat
first, please?
&gt;&gt; Oh, I just was trying to capture some of
what you just talked about, the swivel
chair point of view versus the
walkaround point of view.
which are very different things from u
you know you want to have a cockpit like
you're an airliner cockpit and you have
controls all over the walls and you kind
of reach up and touch things and you can
scroll around but there is the kind of
avatar 3D world avatar where you kind of
move around but you're you're stationary
but you can kind of scroll around in the
world. Um,
now Peter, you were talking about those
walkarounds things. You know, Disney has
them. They're highly expensive and
they're they're interesting things. I
mean, that military certain has them uh
working in different places for training
police. Like they have like a poor man's
version where you're sort of standing on
the inside of an upside down umbrella
wearing socks and the sides of the
umbrella are super slippery and you can
basically walk sort of sliding yourself
provided there's some sort of a physical
harness to keep you from completely
falling over and hurting yourself.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, there used to be one um you had
like a bar around you and you kind of
grabbed onto the bar. It was like
walking on a walking, you know, walk fit
kind of thing, but you had a 360
degree of motion, but you had to have
the bar to keep hanging on, otherwise
you'd fall over and trip. And and
particularly if you're carrying like a a
a weapon or something else, you you're
trying to balance yourself.
It was uh interesting to see those
things. It's
uh for home use, I don't think it's
going to be very practical.
So, I think having a swivel chair point
of view for an interface is really
important, but having the one that you
can walk around is much cooler. Like,
um, Frod, you've you've kind of
demonstrated to great effect how great
that is to walk around things. Um, but I
think you're going to have to have an
intermediate where you can scroll
somehow, you know, recognize some
motions
to walk around without actually
physically moving your body around the
space. Well, the one thing I really did
like was the jump navigation, and I
created a couple 3D spaces like that. I
made a replica of the 2001 monolith at
scale and I was using the jump
navigation to move around and look at
that from different angles. And the nice
thing is I didn't have any sim sickness
issues with the jump navigation where
I'd be using the controller with the
joystick on the controller to point to
the destination jump point and then
instantaneously transition to that
location. And that worked fine. So even
just sitting but using that mode of
navigation, you could have a larger
virtual space that you're poking around
in.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I mean it it is what what we're
talking about here are real constraints
and real concerns. Um hi Tom. Um
&gt;&gt; sorry I'm late.
&gt;&gt; No, no, no, no, no problem at all. But
we're going to
&gt;&gt; really It really did have to be the jump
navigation cuz when I tried the smooth
scroll navigation, I was ready to toss
my cookies.
So having your point of view,
slid smoothly
without any of this feedback to your
inner ear is just nightmarish. But I
guess because we grew up watching
cutscenes in 2D movies for our whole
lives, our brains are wired for the idea
of having the surroundings
instantaneously cut from one to another.
So that doesn't cause any
disorientation,
but just slide a couple feet and the
queasiness instantaneously sets in.
Yeah. Um, so Tom, that's kind of a
summary of the issues at hand. Depending
on how much space you have in your
physical office, you may want AR or VR.
Um, what I'm going to be talking about
now is primarily AR, but not really. I'm
not going to do anything in the headset
today unless something pertinent comes
up. Um, there are some things to
discuss, but um, it is really important
what Peter is saying that if you have if
you don't have a huge office and you
want a huge space, jump navigation and
things like this are important. So I do
think it's crucial to have Yeah,
exactly. Also now smooth navigation
depends on the person but also the
direction I found that if I'm going
forward only as in the world goes like
this it's okay but once I start turning
it's quite nauseous. So some systems
I've tried stupid little shoot them ups
if you instantly turn to the side so
it's a jump but only 90° or 45 and then
you go forward it's very awkward looking
but that reduces because we're you know
the perception of speed is different
this way than this way. So the these are
important issues but okay so we are core
team today I'm going to do
um share video try not to you uh please
tell me that you can see my screen
&gt;&gt; yep
&gt;&gt; hang on you guys are hidden I don't want
that
so okay if you're hidden you're hidden
but as always please speak interrupt me
I can't see other things it's really
brief
and it has to start with an animation
obviously ly. Um, so the topic for the
month is figure and ground, which is
just my arty way of saying document and
workspace. We've talked about this for
the last few years, but I think it's
really a good time to go through it
again. And tomorrow's my birthday, so I
get to decide whatever I want. Right.
Cool.
&gt;&gt; Happy birthday.
&gt;&gt; Thank you.
&gt;&gt; Happy early birthday.
&gt;&gt; Thank you. Thank you. So, this one we
all know. Is it a vase or two people?
So this is kind of the beginning of one
psychology
perspective on this stuff. It was
actually no, let's go back. Actually, it
was actually someone's PhD thesis in the
1920s. I forgot to put his credits down.
The point of the story is that the
ground or the figure as in foreground or
background,
the background is always active and it
can change what is interesting for you,
the foreground or the background. In art
theory, it was rammed down my throat
very much and it was only at more
advanced levels where the nuance was
more accepted rather than you are
drawing the figure, leave the ground
alone, that kind of stuff.
So what we're talking about is
documented workspace but also documented
walk space. That's why I'm commenting on
what we had in the initial discussion
here and that could be virtual or
physical walk.
So here's the thing. There's a lot of
text on screen here. The small sans
serap is actually my prompt to help AI
help me a little bit with this. But so
the point is that
when we are writing something or
authoring something, we have a lot of
context, a lot of references, a lot of
notes, a lot of ideas. We basically have
a huge amount of stuff, some of which
will go into the document. Right?
So now we really need to look at how all
of that stuff
should be interacted with what it should
be and what is useful
because if you look at um the history of
our information stuff it's not going to
be a long history but um we're looking
at um thinking experience and authoring
here. So the very beginning of writing
what with Kuneaform before Kuneaform
properly was these little balls of clay
that inside them had the things that
were written on the outside. So let's
say three barley corn um batches or
something that would be the little hard
balls of clay inside the big one. And it
was only after a while that they
realized they don't actually need this
stuff inside. It's enough to have it on
the surface. So, in a sense, the
overview
became the thing itself. It didn't need
to have what it referred to.
Also, this little tag at the bottom here
comes from um Egypt where you had um
Paper scrolls and you had little slips
hanging up like that. They look very
similar to when you go to a clothing
shop and you look at um where something
was made. that goes back at least 3,000
years before Christ. They're a bit later
than the ruler.
Do any of you know uh Warberg?
Anyone know this guy?
Are you all still here?
&gt;&gt; Yes, we're all shaking our heads now.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Now, this was interesting. This
was um a Claude suggestion. Uh so this
guy was mapping out information
and he put it up on his walls. Here's a
reconstruction later. Um just everything
very similar to as you guys know the
tapestry of Bob Stein. It's a way of
thinking in space and he had the notion
of the law of good neighbor
which is very related to what Mark
Anderson talks about with spatial
hypertext. There's a reason why it's
there and not somewhere else.
And this is uh Robert Caro,
a much more modern example. Basically
having articles that you're writing on
the wall. This is quite close to the
kind of thing we're fantasizing about,
isn't it? But virtually.
It is two-dimensional,
but very cool.
And then the world went digital. And I
call that the great crunch because
instead of having huge walls, we had
relatively small rectangles obviously.
So the knowledge space shrunk and the
interactions expanded.
And that goes back to LAU. If you tell
me, I'll listen. If you show me, I will
see. But if you let me experience, I
will learn. We all here greatly care
about interactivity because it allows
you to experience to do.
There's another great quote though. The
screen gave us an ocean to hold and a
port hole to see it through and called
the port hole interaction. That was
actually something Claude came up with.
I think we're at a funny p place in time
now where we're not just concerned about
AI ghost writing, but they're actually
worth quoting at times.
So preaching to the choir, digital
world, we got hyperard, hypertext, all
these super interactive things that all
rely on knotting things together because
it couldn't all fit in a huge space,
comments, questions, aides, anecdotes.
Okay,
so here we have um Bob Stein's tapestry.
Let's see if it plays properly.
It's very simple, which is of course the
genius. You have videos, pictures, text
on a huge surface that you can very,
very easily focus and go in and out of.
So, it's a very useful thinking space
that is open and lives on the web. So,
this is I would say to Bob, this is the
flat trying to escape into a bigger
world.
So now of course the world is going
spatial
and I call that the great unfurling. I
think it was actually Brandle who used
the term in our community.
And so here's the thing though, one of
the challenges. There's so much more
information available to us now than
before. Partly because we can find so
much stuff in the web and also AI. We
can't just stick it up on the walls. We
run out of useful space. AI will give us
beautifully written, useful, thoroughly
researched stuff within limits.
If we were to put it all on the walls,
um we wouldn't it would be wallpaper
after a while.
So, as an aside, um I had a birthday
party on Saturday and it was at 3 till 3
and then 3:00 in the morning. I had a
very heated discussion with one of my
oldest closest friends late at night and
it was on a topic we're obviously both
passionate about and after a while we
tried to make it a more of a meta
discussion but the thing is I related
that to a friend who was a lawyer today
which is why putting it in here looks a
little tougher. I know you're a lawyer
too, Peter, of course.
And um we were talking about how in this
heated discussion between friends, if we
were in a magical space,
let's say once said, "But this thing
happened at this point in history, we
can literally put it up on the wall over
here on the side on a timeline." Because
very often, at least in my experience,
when you have a heated negotiation with
someone, we keep repeating stuff and
coming back to it. So instead of having
to do a whole paragraph of speech again
can say but there and if we have
scaffolds in the space like here's a
timeline here let's talk let's say we're
talking about values here they can be
over there this that and the other um so
XR may be a very good u negotiation
space so that was a bit of an aside but
then the thing is when we are writing
isn't authorship also a negotiation
between what is required in the final
product and what is available.
Does those two thoughts hang together
well for you?
Negotiating with another person or in
your own head, negotiating between the
material you have, the ideas you have,
and what should be produced, right?
&gt;&gt; I would add negotiating with an AI.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, that's fine. But that's um that
would be
&gt;&gt; it's akin to be it's akin to negotiating
with another person but it's another
person that you don't have to buy a beer
for.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. No, absolutely. I don't have any
problem with that. Negotiating with an
AI or person in this context I think is
pretty much the same. No, it's not
actually because if you put it up if you
put something on the wall, the AI
doesn't have access to it. But Dave
Millard said that is exactly what the AI
should have. So yeah, Tom, you win.
So then in closing the questions for
today and for all
&gt;&gt; and as a kind of a theme for June, how
should we deal with our workspace and
how should we deal with what we create
and how should they relate, right? We
basically in a way have access to
everything right now informationally
speaking. So how should we place it and
how should we play with it?
That that was the presentation bit and
the the way I just want to summarize it
and and frame it for you guys. Hang on,
I'm just getting you back so we can see
you. Is
as you've seen many times an author, we
have a traditional column of text
interaction wise. We can't easily get
rid of it. Maybe we shouldn't. And then
we have all these bits in space, these
knowledge objects, right? Uh I keep
trying to figure out how they relate.
often they don't.
It's very artificial. I built something
to impress you guys. I put all kinds of
things up, but it doesn't help me think.
So, what I'm trying to build, and I
think whether it's an author or
somewhere else, I think as a general
concept is really important. What I'm
trying to understand now is I'm writing
a thing. I'm creating a thing that has
to be thought out that I can share with
you guys or someone else, but it has an
entire world worth of stuff around it.
So I need to have my workspace
and I need to be able to interact with
that in a fluid manner where I have
overviews because it can't all fit and
then I need to have the work product
and I need to have them separate but
also relate to each other. That's the
design problem. Thank you for listening.
&gt;&gt; I think something you need to bear in
mind is constraint is every bit as
important as reach here. Um,
one of the things that I've introduced
into my classes lately, uh, and
something that my students have never
really learned to do, and frankly a lot
of people haven't, if they're not
designers, is iteration. And the idea
that you just don't get access to the
whole library
immediately. And that's not to be mean.
It's not to say, well, you don't rate
access to this, you're not good enough,
or whatever. It's that if you give
everybody too much information at once,
the fact that it's too much information
can also overwhelm and limit their
perception of that information. You
know, if you if you you're you're given
a you know, if you're two inches away
from a pointalist painting, it's too
much information. It's a bunch of dots,
right? But the ability to step back and
see that for itself and then work your
way into how did he construct or how did
she construct this portion of the
painting with these combination of dots.
You know, zooming in and out is
incredibly important. So, um I would be
cautious about giving uh uh uh people,
you know, uh Douglas Adams's infinite uh
perspective vortex.
there's only one person who's ever
survived that. Um, but yeah, I mean,
zooming that, you know, figuring out a
stepping stone to, okay, I've got this.
I need to make the next step into the
next level of information and so on and
so forth. Not as a a barrier, but as a
okay, I understand this part of the
book. Now I can go to the next chapter.
Now I can go to and it's the same
analogy.
How would you do that?
&gt;&gt; By the way, thank you for that link.
Uh that is really really cool.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, it's a great book. It's really
interesting and it's it's a collage in a
book is what it is.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean
yes I mean you see the problem for me is
and some have pointed out that um some
of these discussions might be too much
about my particular product author um
both you know why should people
contribute to helping me make a
commercial product and also
um the constraints of that you know I'm
building it in vision OS so I completely
understand that I am quite um
for that reason we just ask that
remember us when you're Elon Musk.
That's all.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, that won't happen. Um but so so
when Tom when you say something like
this, it's very out of what I'm doing
and I'm very very grateful for it.
Um
can you talk because I can't implement
that now which is wonderful. It's the
whole point of having this discussion.
Can you tell me more about how that
should be actually someone should do
that?
Well, it's about layers of the onion if
you think of it that way. Uh or we
talked about it in the context of this
of the Sloan work in terms of rooms,
right? So, you don't want to see all of
the information at once. You need to
constrain that within a a human
capability of perceiving it, right? It's
you don't want all these stars in the
universe. They look cool and in the
abstract they're really cool, but you
don't understand them. you don't
understand all of the what's going on
behind them, where why they're
distributed the way that they are,
what's actually going on there, that
they're all very different and so on and
so forth. Same thing is true with
information. So, you know, I think that
a series of interconnected rooms of
information, a series of interconnected
bubbles that you're operating in to
where you can pull in and
connect bubbles of information as you
see they're necessary, but you know, or
maybe it gives you suggestions. Maybe it
says, "Okay, Peter's got this really
great bubble on coding. pick your Peter
and you should pull that in and think
about it in the context of language in
terms of the way you're trying to use
language because coding is language. So
how does code what does coding tell us
about language? And so then now I've
fused two bubbles together and I'm
working within that space and they may
be two different sets of information but
I'm I'm still in that space to where I
have that familiar
and I'm not being pushed out into the
you know infinite infinite perspective
vortex. Right.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Um
I I understand that but so
we are normally here primarily dealing
with text as the visual
&gt;&gt; right
&gt;&gt; I would like to do further but when you
do these two bubbles together in my mind
I'm looking computer graphic stuff
you know nice little animations but when
you when you visually do that in what
way can it become visually more useful
Maybe you've already done that if if you
have an image or just reflect. I don't
know.
&gt;&gt; Well, I mean, when you talk about your
clusters, right, when you look at where
you're the system you have right now,
right, which you're looking at, say
you're looking at Doug Engelbart's uh
augmenting human intellect and you've
got all the different, you know, you
what you showed us last week or the week
before, I can't remember when it was. uh
you know that would be a room, but then
you would have maybe a a map that shows
uh connecting rooms that you might want
to explore
after you've mastered the ideas in this.
If you feel comfortable with in this
room, well, okay, now it's time to get
uncomfortable again. I mean that's that
is what learning is is pushing yourself
from oh I already know everything to
okay I can't possibly know everything so
you know I I'm going to be uncomfortable
in the knowledge that I don't know
everything so I want to go into a space
where I'm uncomfortable and start
learning what that is and then
incorporating that with where I'm
comfortable and that's how you learn and
grow as a as a human being in general.
One of the biggest trouble I have, one
of the biggest challenges I have with my
students is they're not used to being
uncomfortable. They've been put into
comfortable rooms, given all the
answers, and told to just repeat them
back. That's a comforting thing. The
second I start telling them, okay, you
got to think for yourself, that's
uncomfortable. That's, you know, and so
can you mimic that in a way that is
feeling fairly safe to the user to be
willing to step into that? Because one
of the cool things about digital
simulation is that you can do unsafe
things safely. You can fly a plane and
crash it without actually killing
anybody or yourself in Microsoft, you
know, whatever. So you can do the same
sort of thing conceptually and mentally.
You can fly a information plane and jump
into something that might seem on on the
on the face of it as being stupid or
irrelevant or something like that that
you wouldn't normally do with a human
and say, "Oh, well, let's look at this
over here, you know, um as a way of
exploring new territory and then saying,
oh, you know what? this does actually
relate to what I'm working on, what I'm
doing, and I need to somehow fold this
back into what that is. And I do this
all the time, but I'm
good at it. I've had a lot of practice.
I may have a natural talent for it, but
I still feel limited because I forget
things and I'm like, "Oh, wow." You
know, and then then something will The
cool thing about AI is sometimes it'll
pull up something I'm like, "You know
what? I had forgotten all about that
book. I need to go back and look at it,
you know, and that's where the human
failing comes in. I mean, especially as
we get a little older and have
birthdays, uh, we we remember less and
we remember the So, yeah.
&gt;&gt; So, Tom,
&gt;&gt; can we help with that?
&gt;&gt; The knowledge navigator you've been
working on,
&gt;&gt; the visualization results, are they from
the system or are they from um kind of
mock-ups to to help you design it?
Currently,
&gt;&gt; no. So the idea is that the system that
the LLM is generating the connections.
It's meant to give you the unexpected.
So um for instance, if I put in two
completely different texts, for
instance, uh maybe Shakespeare and Doug
Engelbart and I put them together and I
say, "Okay, show me all the connections
between Shakespeare and Doug Engelbart."
It might be giving me a a new way of
explaining Doug Engelbart to somebody
who only stands understands Shakespeare
for instance. I mean we use metaphor all
the time. Uh and that to me is is making
unusual connections, right? Making
connections because we work ourselves
into boxes. I only understand
Shakespeare. I don't need to understand
anything else because, you know, that's
what I study. This is Shakespeare and
Shakespeare is great and I love
Shakespeare and I'm always gonna love
Shakespeare. So, I'm gonna stay in the
safe space that is Shakespeare that I
have spent a lot of time making a safe
space,
but is that do I have something now that
that uh is going to push me into a space
where I think about Shakespeare in a
very different way as a consequence of
stepping outside the room and looking
back at it, right? Uh through another
set of lenses. That to me is where real
innovation and growth happens both on an
individual level but also on an
organizational level because we we
develop blinders. And so anything I can
do to strip away those blinders in a way
that I can control
and modulate is is going to be a
powerful tool. And I think you could do
that visually as well. I mean in terms
of a 3D space um if you think about you
know
&gt;&gt; but but the question is
&gt;&gt; how because um
you know our groups keep shrinking and
growing and now we're in one of our
smaller sizes and and what I hear from
from some people is quite a bit of
shouldn't be like this shouldn't be like
that uh it shouldn't be um it shouldn't
relate to what we already have and so
on. And then when I say well what you
suggest then it becomes very difficult
and that's totally fair enough right but
&gt;&gt; well again the metaphor we were using
last semester where we had rooms and so
again if you think of that visualization
that you were showing of Doug Angelbart
as being a room and all those things are
stuck on the wall around you but then
you recognize that that's only one room
or maybe you can fold another room into
it and and reision and reshuffle the
deck
that could create some incredibly
important and uh and again layers of an
onion.
Give me some suggestions of five rooms
that I should look at that are related.
That's where the AI comes in, you know.
Oh, well then you need to look at um at
&gt;&gt; Oh, I I agree with that fully. But I
mean other than having that come up as
five columns of text, how do you think
and also I'm asking the Peters of
course, how do you think it should
visually be represented? How should it
look? I think that that's the rubber
meets the road question.
&gt;&gt; Do do you remember the old maze or
they're still around, but you remember
the old maze games like Doom or or or
Castle Wolfenstein? You're running
around in the maze and you're see
&gt;&gt; yeah you're seeing the you're seeing the
maze in front of you, but you also have
a map up in the corner that tells you
where you are in the maze of what you've
seen, right? Maybe that's the metaphor
you need to use. So the maze part, the
live part, the castle wolf and I mean
the part where you're people are jumping
out and you're shooting them um is the
room you're in, right? But you also then
have a map to show, okay, these are
related pieces of the constellation of
ideas around yours. And maybe you pick
favorites. You say, "Okay, well, Frodo
and I are looking at the same similar
things, but in different ways." So,
occasionally going into Frodo's room and
see what he's working on with your
permission, of course. Um,
tells me more about what I'm working on,
right? So, having that map and saying,
"Okay, these are the rooms you've been
to recently. Uh these are some suggested
rooms maybe that other people are
working on so that you look at it as a
constellation of of planets and you're
on your own planet and you've got all
these other planets but you can jump
from one planet to another or you can
pull their
&gt;&gt; but once you've landed once you're in a
virtual room
&gt;&gt; how
Peter was I think this also goes to what
you're saying so first of all I really
think the idea of having many
workspaces. By the way, what should we
call it? Workspace? Thinking space? We
got to have a name for this, right?
&gt;&gt; Don't call it workspace.
&gt;&gt; Oh, why do you have a strong reaction to
that?
&gt;&gt; It's it's got so many ne negative con
connotations because of Microsoft, I
would say.
&gt;&gt; Ah, okay. I'm not a Microsoft guy, so I
haven't noticed that.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. If if you think of a term because
right now I'm using an even worse term,
but okay.
&gt;&gt; So, you've landed in Pet in one of
Peter's spaces.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And Peter has in this work he's been
working on um he's planning a trip to
Europe and he wants to go to the library
that's behind him. So he's not only got
like a linear itinerary and a map and
all that stuff. There's specific
conceptual ideas about this. How would
you want to
how would you want to experience that?
What what do you want to see?
You know, postits on a wall. And by the
way, I'm not saying that's bad at all,
but do you want to see something
floating in space? What kind of fantasy
do we have here?
&gt;&gt; I would want to I would want whatever
we're seeing to show a certain amount of
recency. So, what has Peter worked on
recently as opposed to what's been
sitting there for a year that he hasn't
really looked at? And for different
reasons, I may want to look at one or
the other. But that's an important piece
of information that he may not need, but
that I as a visitor might need to see,
you know, where's his brain right now,
right?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Okay.
&gt;&gt; So, someone else's room may behave
differently than yours.
&gt;&gt; No, fine. I I I understand. But the
thing is it's still a question of um
&gt;&gt; well I'd want to be able to scrub across
time. Uh maybe multiple granularity
sliders too. Uh one could be years,
another one could be months. Uh maybe
one track could be just semantic with
just names of projects I've been working
on so that I could click on one of them
and bring everything back to the point
in time that I last had that open.
Uh, so are you talking about lists then?
Columns of lists?
&gt;&gt; No, I'm talking like
maybe imagine three tracks of spatial
sliders and I could grab one and move it
back and forth and that would control
the temporal index for the space that
I'm looking at and automatically
reconfigure everything to how it was at
the point of time corresponding to the
current temporal setting.
The other thing is it would be nice to
be able to manipulate someone else's
space without actually manipulating it.
So like going into your office, right?
And I can sit take your ideas and and
and move them around in a different way,
but they don't actually affect what you
say, but I can send it to you and say,
"Hey, have you looked at it this way or
have you looked at it that way?" And
that way you can have that, you know, it
would be one way. So, I could go through
all your books without messing up your
bookshelf, right?
&gt;&gt; Yes, I I agree with all of those things,
but I'm just being a bit of a bully here
to trying to really drill down on what
it would look like.
&gt;&gt; Well, we want to be able to reify all of
that and represent as, you know, maybe a
little green tennis ball. And the green
tennis ball could be how
Tom reconfigured my space. So if I grab
the green tennis ball, suddenly that
would swap out my current viewspec for
the viewspec that he bundled up as the
green tennis ball.
&gt;&gt; Right? So as we were talking about this,
this is happening in the background.
This is art and architecture in two
bubbles merging,
you know. So I'm wondering about this
level of Yeah. By the way, this thing
was supposed to be a cool shape, but uh
I don't know what's going on here.
output audio has sensitive what
two bubbles of concepts art and art
represented as text me uh
I I'll play this again because obviously
uh you guys very well know
one second
you know you very well know that the
kind of hard thing we have and it's not
super visual, right? But it's a
beginning. But the reason I I bring it
up now is um it's real. You know, these
these cards, they have a bit of margin.
They have a background. It takes space.
And we I'm absolutely happy to use color
and shape and all the things we've been
discussing. But if we can have a
concrete example. So Tom, you're walking
into Peter's room. It's a current room.
Uh, Peter, maybe you tell us now
something you're currently working on so
that we have a specific thing. I don't
have to speak step away from the camera,
but I can still hear hear you. Um, why
don't you talk through what Yeah. what
you're working on, then we'll figure out
how to display it. Okay.
&gt;&gt; Okay. I'm
working on
an editor idea
where I want every character in the
editor to have a globally unique
identifier that would be preserved even
if that character gets dragged somewhere
else. Um so as far as data structures
underlying it,
every graphim cluster uh which is the
set of one or more bytes corresponding
to
a combination of unic code points that
when merged produced a single glyph. So
you have combining marks in unic code uh
which sort of might be you know put this
on top of the previous mark and you
combine that little sequence and that's
a graphim cluster. Um examples would be
emoji or multibbyte glyphs from
alternate language panes. Um so each
graphim cluster should have associated
with it a nano ID and that would
represent this particular occurrence of
say the letter A. So if I had two A's,
they'd have different nano IDs. Um also
mapped to that would be a C ID
corresponding to the actual graphim
cluster. So the two A's would share the
same C ID. The C ID would be mapped to
the graphim cluster itself. So that we
dduplicate the graphim cluster storage
and have each symbol in the editor
represented with its ID plus the
underlying C ID representing the graphim
cluster that actually gets drawn on the
screen. Then we'd have all of
the nano ids arranged in a single
immutable but growing list.
Then we can use a bit set to represent a
selection of those nano IDs
that lets us produce
multiple selections that are
discontiguous.
Um then if we copy something
we'd be getting the indices into a
separate document array. Um those
indices would give us the nano ids which
we could then map to the underlying
graphium cluster. Then we could produce
a new nano ID for it in wherever it is
that we're pasting the thing in. But
basically, I want to be able to create
the data trail that lets me know that
this letter A that's now in the second
paragraph of the memo had originally
been copied from a completely different
document that was authored by fraud
three months before. So I want to be
able to trace the whole lineage
and capture all of that information. So
you need some multiple layers of
indirection
and of course once you're working with
the bit sets then it's very easy to
apply set operations to them to do
really interesting things. So I'm
working on the underlying infrastructure
for making that happen. Granted, it's
horribly demanding in terms of memory,
but on a modern Mac, I can afford to
throw all that extra memory to be able
to track all these layers of indirection
and really know the provenence of any
symbol that's appearing at any location.
So, that's what I've been working on
codewise lately.
&gt;&gt; So, how would that then be represented
in addition to a few flat screens? How
might how might you want Tom to come in
and view that? How would you like to
considering the
um I forgot the different kind of
environments you've been talking about?
Um
maybe there'd be a different al cove for
each conceptual level.
So everything related to the
dduplicating data storage would be in
one little al cove. Then everything
related to the nano ID tracking could be
in a different al cove. Um high level
control might be another spot.
Uh
so you're talking about a room like the
one behind you.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Sort of like bays in a room.
&gt;&gt; Tom, what what do you think of that way
of looking at it? or maybe levels. If
you imagine that I was on a vertical
lift that could be going up and down, so
I'm sitting
flat and everything could be sliding up
or down depending upon what level it was
at.
So you could either think that I'm going
up or that all of the bays are being
slid down.
Yeah, I mean I like that horizontally,
but the content that I'm looking at is
scrolling up or down vertically
&gt;&gt; on like a room by room trunk basis.
I mean there have been a number of
fantastical libraries described in
fantasy literature from the one in Harry
Potter to
uh to um the the um
one in um crap so long I read it. It's
great book too. Um the wise man's fear
uh which is a
what's his name? Anyway, they they spend
a lot of time in libraries that are
designed for wizards or whatever, but
they're unconstrained by the realities
of physics in the way that um a real
library would be, or more importantly,
they're unconstrained by the realities
of budget in the way a real library
would be. So, if you conceptualize that
in a way, you know, I'm looking at the
library that's behind Peter right now.
Uh, but if you conceptualize that as a
way of of um
of building,
having the freedom to build, and I like
the idea of al coes uh elevators is
interesting, too. Where was it that had
that elevator? Oh, was in the
foundation, the recent foundation series
where they did it vertically. Um
but um yeah, I mean having some sort of
ephemeral
physical space to complement the virtual
space, you know, it gives people
something that they can uh
mentally latch on to. I've been in an
alche of books before, you know, and so
I know what what that what that feels
like, right? Um,
or
&gt;&gt; I I should note I should note that I
haven't tried a vertical scroll in the
headset yet, so I don't know whether I'd
find that cool or nauseating.
&gt;&gt; Yeah,
&gt;&gt; until I have a whole room of books going
up and down vertically. I don't know if
it would work.
&gt;&gt; Or I'm thinking about the the last scene
in Interstellar
&gt;&gt; with the where he's in the tesseract
essentially and he's got books. That
that would probably MAKE ME SICK.
BUT YEAH, think look to fiction uh look
to uh because fiction is constrained
only by the imagination
but yet it still needs to maintain a
certain level of reality otherwise the
reader is not going to buy it. So you
know there has to be something for that
reader to latch on to. So we're creating
a fictional world here um that only
exists within the context of your
virtual space. So
&gt;&gt; I found
&gt;&gt; something to think about.
&gt;&gt; I found something very useful uh talking
I'll show you the actually no I'll show
you now.
So share
still generating a few but if we look so
this is the first just two images doing
this right that's cool
&gt;&gt; and then we have art and architecture
becoming art uh art you know these kind
of bubbles that we talked about where
the problem is that they I mean they're
amazingly rendered right look at that
&gt;&gt; but uh
&gt;&gt; it's not useful yet
&gt;&gt; so Well, the other thing about it is
that the library itself is nothing but
set dressing.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. No, of course. In this case, the
library here is purely it might as well
be a porest. Exactly.
&gt;&gt; Right.
&gt;&gt; So, here we have another one where on
top there you have these cards meeting
and folding on top of each other.
Different way of doing it here. And then
finally,
they become a book, right?
That's really fascinating because
um
what what is a book in virtual space
irrelevant, right? But it's also a
useful way of um I've taken these
concepts and put them in a not saying it
should be visualized as book, but this
new cube because cube fits writing a
title and a description and maybe have a
colored icons on it
might be a useful kind of a folder,
right? for
&gt;&gt; well what I would say is looking at your
video I would run it in reverse. In
other words, I would have the cards
flying out of the book
to be rearranged into a different
because I mean books are just containers
for ideas. So you know if you want to
unpack that book and have the cards
flying out of it to where you can
manipulate it so that you know that you
can open any book and it'll
automatically give you this forest of of
cards that you can then explore and say,
"Oh, look at this. I didn't even know
this idea was in there. Right.
Tell me where that is. And that's what I
do with Notebook LM already. I mean, in
a sense that I'm I'm having to manually
pull up the cards. But when I have, you
know, when I ask a query and it says
here are the five things that, you know,
you need to that that that if you're
doing systems theory or something like
that, it'll give you a card that
connects you back to the original book
or article where that came from, so you
can work your way backwards, too. But
essentially what I'm doing is I've got a
stack of books and I'm asking it to pull
out what I need from them to answer a
specific question. Right? So think of
that in a visual sense.
Just writing that as a promise.
Yeah, I completely agree. It it needs to
be reversible.
And one thing I briefly had a discussion
with Mark Anderson earlier today was the
difference between an internal file
format and a shared file formats. You
know what are the I mean notionally
everything should be in the published
file that the author wants to include
but the reader may need different ways
of reading it that the author hadn't
necessarily focused on.
you know, an example like this. Um,
so what we're talking about is a a
virtual
thing, book folder, whatever the heck it
is, that technically kind of lives
inside another proper folder, so to
speak, or document.
Because the whole idea of being able to
unfold it is, of course, core to origami
text and everything else we talked about
in in that sense.
have something else to share with you.
So, look at the central one there
on top.
It's kind of cool, right? So, you have
all these ideas. You choose to put them
together and it gave it a title.
I think that's kind of
Isn't that cool how it's just giving us
um tidbits to play with?
Well, it's like an accordion process in
the sense that you want to explode the
book, but then you want to then part of
the process of writing is you explode
the ideas and then you p put them back
together into your own construction
and that becomes a new maybe it becomes
another book, maybe it becomes an
article, maybe it becomes a
visualization. But that's essentially
what you're doing. you're recording it
out, making a mess. Like you whenever
you rearrange, reorganize your room, you
make a mess first because you pull
everything out and you then figure out,
okay, this needs to go here and this I
can get rid of this and this needs to go
so on and so forth. But you have to make
the mess before you can make the neat.
Same thing's true with information. You
have to make an information mess before
you can make the neat. And that's what
I'm trying to do with the knowledge
navigator is I'm trying to create an
information mess that forces you then to
put it back together again into your
version of the need.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; Orderly.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Absolutely. Um
&gt;&gt; it's the anti-German application. It's
disorder. The disorder application. They
must have disorder.
I guess that's Italian, right?
&gt;&gt; That tell when you're talking about
Okay, so let's say you have taken Doug's
62 paper to take the big one
&gt;&gt; and you taken something of Shakespeare
and you've asked an AI to Yeah. What
would you ask the AI to do it in the
style of another analyze their ideas?
What kind of prompt would it be?
Um, well, I think you try several. For
one thing, I would not I would not I I
I'm I'm always resistant to saying,
"Well, what's the right prompt here?"
And I'm like, "Well, that depends a lot
on where you are in the conversation."
But um
just imagining some possibilities would
be uh
is is uh is is uh Angelbart a tragedy or
a comedy or um what elements of tragedy
or comedy are included in you know on
the in the Shakespearean vein are
included in are critical too and and
what can we learn about
the those concepts that were adopted
by you know subsequently to Doug and
those that weren't right so which ones
would be more relevant in terms of
looking at it from the perspective of
Shakespeare is it the tragedy stuff that
got adopted or is it the comedy stuff
that got adopted
um
&gt;&gt; you know is it more entertainment yeah
&gt;&gt; so far you're giving me
A or B as in yes or no kind of um
comments.
&gt;&gt; Well, yeah,
&gt;&gt; but but of course it's even more
interesting if we get a more complicated
kind of answer, right? And I don't I
don't have a prompt for it either. So,
&gt;&gt; well, I don't think it it would anything
in Englebart would necessarily fit very
neatly into either one of those
categories, but maybe there are elements
of this or of that. It's like a sighting
scale, more common, more tragedy, you
know, more history, whatever. Uh, and
then you then compare that to what
subsequently happened as a way of
analyzing how technology and processes
get adopted or not, right? Um and uh
because and you know uh the one thing it
that augmenting human intellect is is
it's a profound challenge and it's a
challenge that a lot of people refuse to
pick up because they didn't see the
point to it. Uh and but it's also you
know every challenge is an opportunity.
Uh those people who did pick it up got
some tremendous opportunity at it. Uh
but
how do you determine which parts of that
is which and where that challenge where
people are going to react because
Shakespeare brings the human into it? So
are people going to react more to the
wow this is hard and I want to climb
that mountain or wow this is easy and I
I want to just sit on my TV and watch
someone climb that mountain. uh you know
and those kinds of questions I think
would be thrown into a certain amount of
relief by com you know fusing the two
together and that's just my first take
at it but yeah something like that I
don't know
yeah I'm just the thing is
um Peter Wasil you and Mark are very
data structure coming out of guys rights
I'm a very visual guy for me text is
always visual. Braille also in a sense
is tactile visual.
So I need to know as a designer even
conceptually what does it look like
then? And what Tom is talking about now
is very worthwhile. But I'm wondering
in many here's the thing. It's quite
clear that in most cases you don't need
VR, AR, XR. It's just not necessary. Of
course not. That's really important and
also in many ways pen and paper is
better than digital when you're thinking
of course right so the issue partly is
when you are in a headset or have
magical thing whatever it is you're on a
specialized environment
how do we represent
what we call the knowledge objects
we have to decide on something right now
they're the most basic they're just
index cards that can be bigger and
smaller that's it
&gt;&gt; mhm Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Once you have
decided on a relationship, like you've
done something like you just talked
about, Tom,
&gt;&gt; the things should probably change
appearance, right?
&gt;&gt; So,
I like the idea of having a workspace
and please help me with a better name
where you have your products over here
right now. It doesn't matter. You have
all these things that we haven't
defined. But when you've decided on
clustering, you can put them together
into a bunch of index cards, a book, an
envelope, a globe, whatever. Some it has
to be something
uh that then has a new appearance
reflecting
the synthesis rather than just this plus
that, right?
Does that make sense?
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
Anybody have any thoughts on how they
would like to see it?
This is where we need Mark Anderson.
I want to see in his bubble.
My programmer has just asked me a
question so I apologize.
&gt;&gt; No worries.
&gt;&gt; Uh yeah, Mark Mark's perspective would
be useful. But the thing is,
okay, I I'll tell you because if if you
think I'm obviously we're all friends
and I mean it in a nice way, but if you
feel I'm being a bully on this on the
visual questioning,
um I I'd like to remind you that the
as an example in author, you know, we
have an outline and overview
When you do that on a laptop, it's
nicely centered. But if you go to a big
screen like a 7 27 inch or whatever,
it's too wide and too far on the side.
Only this week did I decide to fix that.
So when it comes to my own visual work,
I can very often be behind the curb even
when it suddenly became clear this
weekend it had to be done. So I'm asking
you not as a teacher but as a frustrated
colleague. And they're really hard
questions, aren't they? What should it
actually be?
Cuz you can't build a thing without the
thing having components. And in digital,
unless you're talking about sound, in
digital environments, that has to be
visual, right?
Why would you limit yourself in that
way?
But explain how I can unlimit myself.
&gt;&gt; Well, I'm saying why would you live why
would you leave out sound for instance?
You've got you've got speakers in
&gt;&gt; I'm not limit I'm not ruling out sound
at all. Uh what I'm saying is that well
well first of all sound in what we're
talking about here
would be a really interesting side
project to look at. But if you had sound
as the primer, if you have a room full
of knowledge and they all make sound,
that'll be a cacophony of course. So I'm
very very interested in um in haptic
haptics, sound textures, all of that. No
question.
But primarily, I mean also considering
half of our brain is dedicated to visual
processing, half of it, right? That is a
very powerful part of our conceptual and
perceptual apparatus.
So
saying ignoring sound only for the sake
of this discussion
uh digital garden
there is
&gt;&gt; I'm kicking around ideas
&gt;&gt; yeah there are some terms around that as
well um knowledge garden and all of that
stuff but um no what I mean is
&gt;&gt; you don't okay let's just say it's
visual do do you guys have more thoughts
on how you would like to put on a
headset information is presented
visually at least headings or titles or
tags for text. When you open something
up, so to speak, sure it may be in a
completely different form, but at some
point
or would you prefer to only work with
icons?
I think I'd like some sort of a
programmatically generated highle
representation
of the document. Something to give me an
immediate indication of how many
chapters they are. Um how deeply nested
different parts are. Um maybe a tree map
view.
&gt;&gt; Uh I'm I'm talking I'm talking primarily
when you are authoring.
Do you would you also like that when
you're authoring?
authoring
is really really difficult. The only
thing that I feel I have made progress
on is um when you're authoring there's
more stuff you're working with than the
stuff you will make.
Although of course as you write you will
generate new mental stuff, right?
Yeah.
Um
I mean I think that one of the reasons
that I don't like the word workspace by
the way is because it's very bounded.
Microsoft has deliberately designed a
system and attached that name to it that
is that is a bounded system that you
know you get to only play within this
particular schoolyard. Uh, as a writer,
I want uh I want the ability to at least
work on an infinite canvas and take
things where I want them to go rather
than where somebody tells me I should
take them.
And so, um, that's why from a
terminology standpoint, that's one thing
I, you know, I don't, um, I I'd like to
see in a different way. Um,
one other way to approach this is you're
sitting in your office, you're looking
at your bookshelf,
you're trying to write. Imagine it's 50
years ago, okay? You only have your
bookshelf to work with. You don't have
an internet. You don't have um um uh
hard drive even. Uh, and you're sitting
here trying to figure out how do I
explore ideas and see new things
based on the books that are in my
bookshelf or the library. Take your
pick.
What is frustrating you the most about
that environment? What are you missing?
What do you still What do you What do
you need to make yourself
How do you get yourself from being the
struggling writer to the empowered
writer?
Um, and
how can you generate that in a digital
way that wasn't possible? You know,
what's what's missing from the way
traditional books work? How are they
dysfunctional?
I can number name a number of them. I
mean, for one thing,
cataloging them is a pain in the ass. uh
also shelving them in the sense that
okay well this book sort of goes in this
category and it sort of goes in this
category where do you put it right I
have tried so many different shelving
mechanisms for my books over the years
but they're fundamentally limited by the
reality that you know a good book
doesn't just hit one area right it hits
a lot of different areas and may have a
lot of application to different areas so
that's a fundamental flaw that you could
try to
Um I'm sure you've gone through this
mental exercise to a certain extent as
you've been building author over the
years.
&gt;&gt; Um um but now take if you take that to
the next level what have you not been
able to fix with author that you would
like to fix? Where are the frustrations
if you're using author as a writer or
listening to other people who are trying
to use author as a writer? Um where are
the points of friction?
So, I love that I love that question
very very much and um I'm going to go
straight into
in into my actual environment. Thank you
for that way of framing it and asking
Tom. So, it really is what I just said
which I can expand upon. It is I know I
need to produce a document. By document
I mean the verb documentation of
something. I don't necessarily mean it
in the traditional doc or JPEG or
whatever, right? But it's a thing for as
an artist. That's, you know, that's my
background. I remember as a teenager,
there was an exhibition and I had a
picture. It was all fine. And there was
glass on top of it. And I, oh no, hang
on. I'm going to put a coin on each
corner. And she said, "At some point,
you have to define the frame.
You can't just have it forever growing."
Of course, it can be disagreed. You
could say she's wrong. But I feel that
is really important in this context,
right? which is partly why I don't like
Google Docs. So when it comes to the act
of writing, I'm trying to produce a
package journey for someone, trying to
introduce it clearly, trying to have
some sort of a summary that may be an
action. Get inspired or do this with a
lot of points inside
uh giving the rationale, the logic and
the supporting evidence. Right? To do
that I have to have two things available
to me. One of them is all the supporting
evidence citations which come either
through AI support or through web
reading or a library. You know what
other people say and then I need to have
access to my own thoughts. You know
walking down the streets. Oh I need
to add this.
So it is for that reason that I feel
that it is very very important to not
only have a nice writing space
but all the supporting stuff what we're
talking about today the figure and
ground the background dealing with that.
So
&gt;&gt; so I agree with you um as an author you
have to construct a frame. The question
is who gets to decide the size and shape
of that frame? Is it you or the tools
that you're working with?
&gt;&gt; Hopefully.
&gt;&gt; And this is Sorry.
&gt;&gt; It should be you, right? I mean, if you
have an infinite canvas, if you have an
infinite uh that you should design the
frame the way you want it.
&gt;&gt; Uh and maybe things spill outside the
frame. I mean, I've seen art that spills
outside the frame. It does some I've got
a piece sitting downstairs which the
author has painted on the mat as well to
shows the art spilling outside the
normal frame that the mat creates for
instance. And that's a really cool
effect. Um, but you as the artist, you
as the the creator should design the
frame. The problem we run into is that
the logistics of this are building other
people building frames for this or not
building I mean the book is a frame. A
bookshelf is a frame. If you do not have
internet, if you do not have a hard
drive, that frame is limited by what's
in your and maybe you can't get around,
go to the library, whatever, but that
frame is limited by what you can make
sense of in front of you, right? That
really limits the frame.
&gt;&gt; Uh the internet is a frame in a
different way because of the opposite
problem. It is an infinite bookshelf and
you just can't find So, uh oh.
Um
&gt;&gt; I'm still here just being interrupted
but I can hear you.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. So the in infinite you know
the the internet is a
is a frame that is uh got the opposite
problem. It's too much information and
you you are the the limitation is your
consciousness ability to absorb that
that that that massive canvas of
information. So now we've gone from
being really bounded in a situation
where we were really limited by the
number of books that we have where you
could go back 200 years you know Thomas
Jefferson had the biggest library in
America and it was in his you know in
his study upstairs and became the core
of the University of Virginia library
but um you know that was his frame and
and anything he couldn't put in it and
so collecting more things to make that
frame bigger was essential task. So,
anybody who's ever collected books to
build up a a scholarly library like my
father's which my god took forever to
liquidate
um you know that's that was him building
his frame right so how does the
technology I think AI reshapes our
ability to perceive the frames uh I
think XR can also change our ability to
perceive those frames and therefore
change our uh capability abilities as
author to define our own frames as
opposed to Microsoft or Google defining
them for us.
&gt;&gt; So you basically said Tom what this
entire project is about and it is us
conceptually coming together to design
the frame, the scaffold, the the size,
the space, the presentation of our work.
Absolutely.
&gt;&gt; Yeah,
&gt;&gt; that that's the key thing. Um I guess
&gt;&gt; I think it's the power over that frame
that really is what matters.
&gt;&gt; So
&gt;&gt; to the extent you can give that to the
user as opposed to defining it for them.
&gt;&gt; Yes. But um well there has to be some
initial defining because
the more power you give to the user the
more Hang on the
Yeah, the camera disappeared. Sorry
about that. the more you give to the
user, the more skills they will need to
to create the scaffold themselves. You
know, you give someone a pile of bricks,
they can build any house, but takes more
effort, so to speak. So, it's a balance.
Of course, I agree with you. But in
terms of the naming though in my own
environment now it's called context at
this point
where
you know you just you map things out and
if they're tagged as context well okay
here's the workflow currently let's say
you're learning stuff about the brain.
So you go and you produce a map in
author about functional connetos
anatomical things processes all kinds of
stuff. put it out whatever way you want
and then well oh sorry so that even
though it's just flat on your computer
it's considered your
the stuff that isn't in the book that
you're going to be writing
&gt;&gt; then you start a new document where you
write the brain is interesting blah blah
blah what you do is you paste all of
that stuff
with what we're now talking about
currently it's called paste as context
&gt;&gt; when you enter the headset
You can have two types of things
floating in space context or not
context.
The so if you turn on very easily if you
turn on ignore context that means that
if you do select all persons if that if
there is a person that is tagged as
context that person will not be
selected.
So they kind of interactive but at the
back of the room, right?
&gt;&gt; I think this is an incredibly powerful
way of looking at it and it's something
we've been discussing over the last few
years. But
when I explain this to people, they
don't get it very quickly. That is not
their fault. That is the fault of the
vocabulary
&gt;&gt; or the educational system which gives
them lots of frames but doesn't teach
them how to be frame makers.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, maybe.
No, not maybe. Absolutely. I run into
this all the time. The the the real
cognitive leap for my students is
interesting because uh I've actually
with the way that I've designed my
course right now uh I can analyze
exactly where they run into major
cognitive roadblocks. And the part where
they get into immediately have that
trouble is when I ask them to build
their own frames. when I asked them to
build their own environments with
websites,
uh they have a real struggle with that.
And it's really interesting because the
students that pass that on, uh on on
schedule, in other words, don't miss the
deadline, right? Uh 100% of them pass
the class. The students that don't, 14%
pass the class.
That is and and but that's not unique to
my students. I think that's something
that the educational systems that
prioritize memorization and
regurgitation
uh train us to do. They give us all
these frames. They give you they give
you problems and you have to find
solutions for them. Well, a problem is a
frame. If you've ne but most of the time
when you're given a problem, you don't
have the context for the you have to
build your own frame around it,
especially if it's a complex problem. So
therefore,
you know, you have to learn how to build
frames. Uh, and so maybe part of this is
a tutorial. Maybe we need to teach this
is a way of teaching people how to do
um
&gt;&gt; Tom, I agree with
&gt;&gt; to do build frames. I
&gt;&gt; I agree with you, but we still need a
name.
&gt;&gt; Um, how about a sandbox?
No,
no, that that's conceptually very cool.
But the thing is um and what's really
annoying because I'm obviously talking
to my friend Shannon at the same time
&gt;&gt; and Shannon is suggesting knowledge
garden.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Nothing to do with digital garden.
Completely different. Right.
&gt;&gt; How about a car?
&gt;&gt; That was one That was one of my other
suggestions, but yes.
&gt;&gt; Exact. No, exactly. That's why I'm I'm
joking that it's similar. So, sorry
Peter, were you saying something?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. How about a carol? like a study
carol in the library.
&gt;&gt; Uh can can you write that as well,
please? I I'll just read some of the
suggestions that's it's given us. See if
we can because the thing is Jack Park
was a wonderful guy. A lot of what he
works on is knowledge gardens.
And so that language is very much in the
kind of knowledge mapping field.
&gt;&gt; So yeah, but I mean it it looked at
things like
&gt;&gt; But how big is the knowledge mapping
field? Seriously.
&gt;&gt; No, no. I'm not saying it it should be
ignored but then again it is
&gt;&gt; not everybody has an affinity with
garden as a knowledge thing rather than
as you know a dirt place with grass they
don't go so yeah I personally you know
look outside I I I relate but
um you know this there's some
constellation orbital field it looked
into that kind of stuff what is around
also went the opposites ground it it is
the ground from which you build
&gt;&gt; vista was one this is not bad actually
stock
&gt;&gt; ecosystem
&gt;&gt; what I put in there ecosystem
&gt;&gt; very good thank you um Peter can you
write what you said as well please
&gt;&gt; yeah I'm trying to look up a citation
for it
&gt;&gt; okay it also then in the second session
was haunt spot retreat studio den snug
nook cozy the quiet the buzz the table
this is for the kind of space you want
to be in when you're writing when you're
working
and um towards the end here it went into
knowledge garden knowledge terrain
knowledge landscape
knowledge commons the study
so um was I can't remember the guy's
first name uh John not I think uh what
is the internet really this is like from
15 years ago he went into the direction
of an environmental eco
explanation for describing what the
internet was, not the web, the internet.
Uh, and um, I think he went and landed
on ecosystem. I've got the book here
somewhere, but as usual, I can't pull it
up in my XR environment, so I can't find
it really quickly. I could spend five
minutes digging through my bookshelf
finding it, but
um,
I think it's John. That's the other
thing is I can't remember used to
describe
the internet
in his book. What is the internet
really? It's a good book.
&gt;&gt; It's very readable. It's a good book to
give to people who don't who aren't
techies, right?
&gt;&gt; It's one o'clock.
No, it's not the That's not the book.
Why? Why does your clock That's you,
Peter, right? Because you're the only
one I know of that's sitting in the
Eastern time zone right now.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, that would be my Mac. I'm not sure
what background utility is doing it. I
set it up years ago.
&gt;&gt; But I'm just curious because new Zoom
doesn't by default have system sounds
that go through it. you know, I have to
actually tell it if I'm sharing screen,
use the computer audio, otherwise it
doesn't pick it up. And I could play my
I could play my music right now and
you'd hear it through the microphone,
but not, you know, um
uh but you wouldn't play directly
through Zoom. And that sounds like it's
playing directly through Zoom.
&gt;&gt; Guys, do you know that I used to have an
assistant that I developed called Lisa,
Liquid Information Speaking Assistants?
Are you familiar with that by any
chance?
&gt;&gt; Yeah,
&gt;&gt; because that was based on a human voice
and that would speak the time if you
wanted. So that kind of makes me smile
when I hear it like that.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, he uh Nton calls it a complex
ecosystem,
&gt;&gt; a dumb network,
uh a global machine for springing
surprises. I like that. It's a little
wordy
and general purpose technology or
utility.
But the what he lands on at the end is a
complex ecosystem,
but ecosystem for short.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Rich ecosystem maybe. I don't know if
you need a second descriptor.
&gt;&gt; Well, it is um it's supposed to appeal
to students as well. So, it should be
&gt;&gt; right. I mean it's funny with Claude
because I said what about thinking room
or mental space he says mental space can
mean insane
and um so room to think and all of that
is good and the clearing or thinkery
horn
&gt;&gt; or gaia
&gt;&gt; study garden studying garden
&gt;&gt; you could go with Gaia
&gt;&gt; which as an ecosystem
&gt;&gt; well terra
&gt;&gt; I'm just thinking about your your
virtual room which is of a comfortable
size, not the entire
&gt;&gt; and you're sitting there doing your your
work and you have all your bits to think
about around you,
all your little cards or whatever.
So, the the ad that I made was when you
write in a thinking space,
is thinking space so awful?
&gt;&gt; I mean, Tom, you're the
If would you tell yourself
&gt;&gt; it's not
&gt;&gt; put put on this headset and go to your
thinking space.
&gt;&gt; No,
&gt;&gt; that implies you're not in a thinking
space already. Um,
&gt;&gt; okay. Just for your stupid students
though.
&gt;&gt; I don't like to think of my students as
stupid because they're in they're in
lies darkness. Um but uh I would say you
know the idea of a study carol study
room
um reflection space
um you know my thinking space is not a
room it's taking walks a lot of times
when I'm stuck I just go out and take a
walk and you know my brain I don't I try
not to start with a set agenda and I
just sort of let my brain go and event
and I end up laterally thinking myself
into, you know, this morning I was
worried about this article I'm working
on for the Chronicle of Higher Education
and but then I went out walking and I
was like, you know, I'm going to be
spending an awful lot of time sitting at
my desk. I wonder if I should get one of
those uh ellipticals that you can put
under your desk and and then I started
researching that. So, I mean, is and I
didn't start out thinking like that, but
you know, maybe it makes my my
tendinitis better.
you know, solved a problem I wasn't
looking to solve. A lot of times that's,
you know, the analogy I like to make a
lot of times, and again, this is kind of
the idea behind the knowledge navigator.
If you ever do astronomy
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; and because of the way your eye works,
if you're looking straight on on
something, um, you don't actually see it
because your retina has a blind spot
right in the middle. So, the trick is if
you're doing astronomy is to look
slightly off to the side and then you
will see it. And so to me, a thinking
space is looking slightly off to the
side and then you will see things that
you're not expecting to see because if
you're looking straight at it, you miss
it. Uh, and I think a lot of times, you
know, this is what my students run into
is again, they keep banging themselves
up against the wall because they're just
looking straight ahead. And I'm like,
well, go around the damn wall, stop
running into it and complaining about
your head hurts,
you know? And that's that's kind of a
natural thing I've trained myself to do
over the years because I don't respect
walls to but to me that's a rich
thinking space is the again I don't like
anybody else making my frames for me. Um
that doesn't mean I don't want to frame
as a photographer. U you know I hate
framing actually as a photographer.
That's why I go with the metal prints
because then I don't have to frame them.
Um the but uh but that's dex that's a
dexterity precision thing that I just
suck at and um uh but the idea that I
have to you know work within a frame
sometimes that constraint is good you
know sometimes I know I'm like I have to
go to this aspect ratio so I need to
make the composition work in this aspect
ratio that's fine but fial yeah exactly
&gt;&gt; there
also the notion of studio because Tom
used to
&gt;&gt; Yeah. studio,
&gt;&gt; you know, that that doesn't say you're
stupid outside of it, but it's a special
place.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Studio is a great term. It implies
creation because artists work in studios
and uh designers work in studios. Uh
accountants don't, but maybe they
should.
Maybe I should just call it phobia
centralis and not explain to people that
means that you're blind when you're
there.
&gt;&gt; I'm not sure that's a selling point you
want to go for.
&gt;&gt; Probably not.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Studio. I like the studio.
&gt;&gt; Better than workspace thinking space.
&gt;&gt; Absolutely. Yeah. Yeah. I mean studio is
a little overused too like sandbox.
Um
&gt;&gt; what do what do the Peters think about
studio?
put on your headset and go to the studio
instead of going to your physical
studio.
&gt;&gt; Uh, it might sound a little too artsy
for some people.
&gt;&gt; Good. I like it.
I think of studio like um ideides and
computing like like my computer geek
side as it's it's it's you know Android
development studio or I don't think of
it as an art thing for my computer geek.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, you're a geek. Um I think a
professor
&gt;&gt; studio
&gt;&gt; art
&gt;&gt; then in closing and thank you for for
staying over time if in the work that
I'm doing right now I have you have your
document and you have your nodes that
relate to the document but everything
kind of in the background or around we
say that is your studio not your office
not your workroom not your garden but
studio
&gt;&gt; cognitive studio video.
&gt;&gt; I was thinking that in the beginning,
but you probably won't need that. I
mean,
I mean, Tom, imagine
&gt;&gt; I'm thinking about what Peter's But
Peter said, though that sounds too
artsy. So, how can you make studio sound
less artsy?
&gt;&gt; Well,
let's keep that in the back of our minds
for a second. But Tom, you have a
student just coming into your office
&gt;&gt; struggling with something. All these
software things are built. Headsets are
cheap.
Um, would you feel comfortable saying,
"Look, listen, you probably want to go
put all of this stuff up in your studio
knowing that you're referring to the
digital studio, right?
&gt;&gt; Interctum."
&gt;&gt; I like Inter too.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, studio works. It might become like
web. We say web, we know what we mean on
the web. It's not internet or interweb
or, you know, waste or any of the old
names for a thing. So maybe studio will
hit, maybe not. layer
band cave. Yeah,
&gt;&gt; I'll keep that in mind.
And um I'm very grateful and we're 10
minutes over. Thank you guys.
&gt;&gt; Uh we'll continue this next week. I'll
try to I'll probably do a really brief
demo if I actually build something. But
other than that, I'll try to keep the uh
topic more general so it's um and and do
that clearly to the rest of the
community. Plato's cave. Ah, don't make
me think. That's a good one, actually.
All right, bye for now. Have a great
&gt;&gt; Thanks a lot. I'll see you.
&gt;&gt; Bye.
