Kind: captions
Language: en
Right. Hi guys.
&gt;&gt; Hi George.
&gt;&gt; Hi. Okay. Uh Moit uh going to do five
minutes of this and then we're going to
go into your presentation and onto the
the normal scheduled day. Um, so,
&gt;&gt; okay,
&gt;&gt; I know you I know you've seen Mark, but
the reason I'm being all Let me show
Mark is Mark is one of my closest
friends and we have almost nothing in
common except for an interest in
hypertext, which is where a lot of our
very interesting discussions come from.
Would you agree, Mark?
And and I speak heap minds, so that's a
difference. And
&gt;&gt; uh, sorry, I just said yes, absolutely.
[laughter]
&gt;&gt; Right. So, here's the thing. Um, and
this is important and relevant. Uh, I
I've been texting Mark today to come and
he is overloaded with ACM work right now
and he sent a message saying it's like I
have a religious fervor and I kind of
shot back, but it's true. I do. So, I'm
going to show you guys um cuz the rest
of you have already seen
um the well the both of you. You both
already seen the the Atlas and things,
right? So, you know this is production
proper code. Eric is running it. Um, so
now I'm going to show you how I do it uh
very specifically. So
the window on the left with the green
stuff is for people who is not me. I am
not that kind of a person, right? Mark
went through the PhD program with me is
much more technically acute than I am
even though he doesn't do programming
these days though he has done. Um, so
today I was lucky enough to have an hour
with our former professor and now friend
and collaborator Dave Millard. So I'm
going to read the prompt that I wrote
into this program here. So this is the
liquid view that Eric has running
and this is how while I was sitting I
had 15 minutes. I was early for the
meeting. So I wrote to Claude and and
and Mark just to really simplify clarify
the central column is the entire
interaction I have with Claude.
You can see it with a blue bit on top,
right?
&gt;&gt; Yes. Sure. Sure.
&gt;&gt; Everything else for our intents and
purposes is irrelevant.
So I wrote, I'm about to have a meeting
with my former professor Dave Millard
who was a leading figure in the field of
hypertext. Please research all you can
about him and his work. Tell me if you
think of a relevant view to add to
origami text for Mac OS to enable
something he's been working on or
writing about. If I agree with you and
please suggest more than one view if you
want to, we'll build it to show him. So
already this ain't coding. I told it to
go do research and it did.
Right? So he he says, you know, that
this is who he is. And then he suggests
these things and he says, this is based
on I'll skip down here. This is based on
something he wrote eight weeks ago.
&gt;&gt; Oh,
&gt;&gt; I mean, holy moly, right?
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; So, and then I said, okay, fine. I mean,
it's saying lots of other cool stuff.
And I said, yeah, implement this thing.
So, okay, fine. I'll do that.
So, I'm just going to add this up. So
down here, the way this is structured,
and it's going to change
because it's been overloaded because
this is me in a candy shop. Uh we have
dialogue, outgoing, message, income, all
of that stuff. But down here we have a
category of views and this mark is where
I think the hypertext ideas really come
into it and which is why Eric has
created a ZZ structure interaction for
it. So this is what um
this is what uh Dave Millard wrote eight
weeks ago and Claude implemented with
one prompt.
&gt;&gt; It takes a while because it's locally
going through all the documents. Oh, I
haven't pressed the button yet. There we
go.
So this is encapsulating essentially
what the AI does if you use it in any
other prompt and ask it to give basic
give an argumentation structure of
&gt;&gt; I'm not this is not this not I'm just
trying to understand what's genuinely
new as opposed to what's reboxing of
stuff the latter is not the latter is
not without worth at all
&gt;&gt; but it's important to understand sort of
where you know
&gt;&gt; I don't Just trying to get my head
around what's what's actually genuinely
new as opposed to unexpected.
&gt;&gt; Right. So what is genuinely new for me
is that when I'm in here
because it is exactly like I'm sitting
next to a worldclass programmer who's
read as you said last week all the all
the manuals
and who it doesn't get bored with um
refactoring and things like that. That's
what's new because I gave it and
remember the Tom we're doing stuff you
already know. We started a bit early
because Mark has a lot of on his plate
today. So the thing is when it went out
and made this stuff the result doesn't
necessarily need to have any AI in it.
So I'm not making an AI thing now.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Okay. So this happened to be exactly
what Dave wrote about. I showed it to
him over lunch and said yeah that's
right. And I did two more. Here is a
trails thing which is very you know in
our field and also geometries. This is
the exactly the workspace that he talked
about. I could
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And I mean this is interesting. I
mean this because very similar to
something I saw back in about when was
about January February someone would did
a similar basically they'd use the
tinderbox MCP to do something similar.
Um, so it's interesting in the con to
put it in the wider context. So the
exciting part is yes that anyone can do
in Xcode. What's interesting is you
don't actually have to use Xcode. It's
just a convenient way to do it.
&gt;&gt; It's different. Mark, I have to have to
pause you on that because
my friends who are technically adapt who
live and do coding in a browser with
code or whatever, they do really
powerful stuff, but they are
programmers. I have
&gt;&gt; no these weren't programmers. So that's
why I'm saying just just just trust me
that in in something you haven't seen
that. So again, don't misread this. I'm
just trying to contextualize here. So
this is interesting because it's
actually confirmation of something I've
already seen elsewhere.
That doesn't that doesn't in any way
sort of devalue it. Um the interesting
thing is is um and it's something a
conversation I'm involved in in other
contexts is is um h is is this thing of
being able to move quickly from having
some information to exploration of it.
Um and this is another instance of
reducing the friction of that. Um we
still have the challenge of whether we
understand what we see. um which is also
&gt;&gt; Mark it isn't that what what what I'm
presenting here is not my piece of
software which I'm very proud of what I
am presenting is the process
of how now revolutionarily simple it is
you know I have gotten several app store
apps out of this speaking assistant the
interatlas
um this origami text this origami text
can export and import to eub origami
textile. I've gone through several ways
of doing it. So the the program I would
love to discuss with you at some point
all of you because I have to change it a
lot. But the fact I mean I could
literally now say
you know um
okay do any of you have an idea for way
you would like to see this kind of
letter and things view? I could write it
in and because this is aggressively open
source there's two things that are
really important. one
if you click on this and open this
document which is just a markdown
document
what I'm structuring it almost works is
that you can go to any AI you want give
it this document and say I would like a
view that does this stuff according to
this document it'll spit it out in a
format that can then easily be put into
this piece of software
right so the it is layers of super easy
prompting
So the thing is once it's built so um
you have the interaction whilst it's
being built but you don't necessarily
have the reaction beyond. So, one of the
interesting one of the interesting
things about this is the when I've been
watching and I'm sorry it's a
conversation that's been going elsewhere
but already using this sort of thing and
then thinking about well it's the
researching because often we we can
imagine things and we can imagine
something that looks interesting and
it's exciting and interesting but it's
it turns out to be less informative than
we imagine simply because what it tends
to do is reveal another layering to the
information the knowledge we're trying
to explore.
&gt;&gt; That's that still isn't it that what I'm
in terms of what you're right. You're
not I'm not arguing against you, but
what I'm really quote unquote selling
here is the fact that if if you this
source code is available, you can open
up this and say I want the view that is
like tinderbox in this way and you just
describe it in normal pros and it will
build.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, we know this but we know this
works. That's not new. So,
&gt;&gt; okay. you know that I as I say I that's
that's entirely possible and that
doesn't in any way take away from this
but it's not it's probably less than you
imagine it to be
&gt;&gt; I have spent £250,000 to build author
over the years I've spent £1,000 on this
over the last week I gotten better
results
&gt;&gt; this scale that's fine in terms of but
hang on in terms of cost of production
&gt;&gt; this is at least 100 times cheaper and
it is instant So, as a designer, if I
think for one of the last things that
came up was um the file format naming
wasn't right, not only will it change
it, it'll refactor to everything that
needs to be done to change it. Hi,
Brandle.
Uh we're going over to uh Mo in a
second. I'm very glad you're back. I
just want to say you're at the tail end
of a um discussion that I know is a bit
out of your wheelhouse, but it is um
clawed inside Xcode
because I'm just making the point that
I've now done several apps including
textual apps like this to experiment
with views of the information we have
purely by writing prompts
and and I do think that is like having a
worldclass couldn't be tired programmer
camera is sitting next to you um all
day, all night. And maybe one of the
most important things refactoring it
doesn't mind doing so. The code is
always as clean as it could be. And I
think it changes what information is
because it means that the cost of making
a piece of software that interacts with
your letters, your emails, your
hypertext, whatever, is lower than a
normal off-the-shelf piece of software.
It's almost like pen and paper.
Anyway, how was China?
&gt;&gt; Uh, good. There were I went to lots of
it. I got within
uh
80 miles of the border uh
with uh North Korea and Russia. Was um
80 miles from Vladivosto and then up to
just by Inner Mongolia uh over and the
Tibetan plateau in the Hashi corridor.
&gt;&gt; [snorts]
&gt;&gt; Uh yeah, it was a really really
interesting uh way to get around and see
the country and see where everything is.
&gt;&gt; That is super cool. That's amazing. I
hope you took a few photographs that you
will share later.
&gt;&gt; I did. I took many photographs.
&gt;&gt; Good.
Um so we're going to go over to Mahit in
a minute, but Mark, I think I've done
the the pitch. I think you get it.
Whether it's useful for you or not is
entirely something else.
&gt;&gt; No, I I think it's very interesting. I I
think I I'll try and make a quick
observation because it's real a shame
I'm going to drop off. My apologies my I
mean just ran with stuff is that okay I
think something that I I would I would
say at this point is well an interesting
observation that came to me somewhat
unexpectedly is that uh the cool bit is
we can make all these visualizations.
The experience of people watching people
do this quite recently is that it merely
shows that you move the thing forward a
bit. So, uh, it's great that an app can
make this. What you actually want is is
then the next stage is the app that lets
you ask the secondary question. So, it
shows you view X or view Y, but you
realize that actually doesn't show you
um something you want. Now, the
interesting thing is if you're just
using somebody else's data or database,
you're stuffed because you can only use
what's there. The interesting thing that
is happening I've seen doing where they
people actually have the information
themselves is to then be able to
basically resection the information do
the abstraction necessary to give you
the building blocks to make the thing
that you now understand you want. Um and
those people are doing it by MCP but I
think it's terribly easy to get uh
overblown about which AI and what thing.
The AI is very capable. It's really
good. Um it's big it's one big thing and
I'll leave I'll leave this point for you
to consider the one thing that it's
really quite articulate about it
inability to do is to hold multiple
contexts at once which is seems still a
human skill we haven't uh we haven't yet
managed and that's really interesting
for not for when you're doing sort of
work with textual knowledge and you're
trying to actually uh uh take structure
from it.
&gt;&gt; This is not about the AI. It truly
isn't. This is about having an entity
that can build you a nonAI app like the
globe just
&gt;&gt; Yeah, but but it is a the AI is building
the app. That's the only AI you need.
&gt;&gt; But the thing is so far having built
several apps, robust code, it works. The
data formats are solid, right?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I'm not saying No, no, I agree.
I'm not saying it doesn't.
&gt;&gt; It is. My point is just that
the the limitations of what an AI can do
and stuff is interesting and something
to discuss. But the centrality of it is
if you now mark download Xcode, open it
up and just allow cloud to be there. You
can type in uh I'm a fan of Ted Nelson.
Build me something cool that he would
like. It will effing do that.
Mindblowing. Will it do it the right
way? Of course not. Then you enter it
like you would do with a team of human
programmers. Yeah, but you also the
thing very important there. You just
iterate. Well, the reality is of course
you can iterate an awful lot. Um,
&gt;&gt; different people have different
experiences. I'm just I'm just being I'm
just being practical about about that.
So, one of the really interesting things
you find people writing about this is
the time shift. So, the time you used to
spend something else, you now spend
boting, I think is anyway. So, you're
you're basically having to do this
resection.
&gt;&gt; I'm sorry. No.
&gt;&gt; Yes. Absolutely. And there are people
who are have the expertise to know that
writing about it.
&gt;&gt; No, Mark.
&gt;&gt; I facto.
&gt;&gt; I have built these things. They work.
&gt;&gt; Yes, I understand that. I'm trying to
say that I'm not saying you haven't
built something or any of that. It's it
actually works. Try it someday. Anyway,
um it's fair enough that you have a
concern about the AI, but the thing is I
write I want this and I get it. That's
the
&gt;&gt; No, no, no. Cuz I finished cuz Moit
needs to speak. I'll just say that.
Yeah, I get it. It's less new than I
thought it was. Uh, it's great that one
can do it. I'm not I'm not convinced
it's quite as re revolutionary as as
perhaps proposed, but it's useful if it
gets people to where they need to go.
Right. I have absolutely no idea what's
going on there. Right. Um, we will get
back to this um after your presentation.
Mar uh I'm going to go briefly through
the app. So then most of the time after
that will be Eric going through his
experiments with uh ZZ space structures.
Uh Brandle, I don't know if you can hear
me, but currently um today Moit's going
to be talking about what he's building.
Then Eric and I will talk about a Mac
native app. And I know you're not a Mac
native guy, but the structures within
that should definitely be both XR and
opensource um web XR and so on. So it is
going from A to B. Uh Maria, please go
ahead.
&gt;&gt; Okay. So, I'll uh start uh with sharing
my screen.
Okay.
Is screen okay?
&gt;&gt; Yes. Thank you.
Okay.
Okay. So, uh uh thank you fruit for uh
for this.
It's amazing to have an audience like
you guys and I'm looking forward to uh
you know your comments and ideas as
well. This is uh this is something that
I've been working on thinking and uh uh
you know trying to give it a form that
uh other people are able to uh
understand and uh so that uh you know we
can make something out of this.
So uh
you so transforming uh the medium of
interaction into a medium of cognition.
Uh so this you know the project uh this
project is about uh is about building a
new category of uh information tools
interfaces that can augment how we
connect things. Uh we already have tools
for searching, recommending and
answering. Uh but I think there is still
an unressed category
uh which we can refer to as navigational
systems. I'll I'll open up about you
know why I'm calling this navigational
systems later. A system of tools that
during one's encounter with things in
the world can bring one's past resources
in life contact with the things one is
interacting with that present so that
the connecting work that normally
happens only in our head can take place
on the screen during our act of
navigating through the world. So that's
why you know I'm calling this uh
transforming the medium of interaction
into a medium of cognition.
uh so you know starting off you know we
focus on I think you know I don't need
to um tell a whole lot where everyone uh
is I think much aware about this uh
uh yeah so
every day we are interacting with a lot
of things and the processes uh so this
is you know the distribution I'm using
uh the theories of distributed cognition
to uh to ground this
the the whole
the whole project that uh the cognitive
activities they are not just uh in our
brains inside but rather spread out
through the mediums through our
activities in the world.
uh
yeah so you know in my work I try to
move beyond this idea of independent
things co coexisting so you know we
currently are understanding that you
know everything is connected things
depend on each other but there this uh
interdependence is uh sort of uh still
even in this conception we generally do
consider things to be
to be existing as in earth but in
relationship with other things. In my
project, I'm considering them to be
onlogically connected with each other.
So there is no uh independent existence
possible. So neither do things exist in
inertly uh and uh the onlogical
independent of other things nor does so
sorry I'm sorry I'm sorry guys.
Yeah. So a different you know a
different conception of cognition of
understanding the world can in turn
generate new imaginaries about the
pursuit of augmenting human cognition.
It is through the cartisian conception
of cognition as an innate process
existing entirely inside human brain
that we arrive at ambitions of creating
a digital oracle oracle so powerful as
to solve all our problems ranging from
the existential to the million. you know
Tom often uh tells you know how uh he's
having a hard time making his students
understand uh that you know there is
there are more capabilities with these
AI LM models than just asking them for
answers and uh you know he as he shares
he has discovered through the chat logs
how uh that the students are treating it
as art or articles so you know part of
the I think you know it's not just
marketing thing, but it is also that how
we have understood cognition
traditionally. Even though
scientifically our conceptions have
changed, but the cartisian model of
cognition still prevails and in building
these tools, the imaginations
of the of a lot of the it is around
building systems that can predict your
next moves, that can predict correct
answers, that can tell you what to do.
Uh that's all the thing
and so
this is
so you know throughout history um we
have had different sort of mediums I I
spoke about this uh the last time I was
presenting so I won't go over this much
Yeah, I really want to know um more
about what you're building. So I look
forward to that.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Okay. Yeah, just so you know
meaning doesn't emerge uh from a thing
in isolation and uh it arises from the
interplay between what one is currently
encountering and what one has already
contracted with or past readings, things
one may have said, half remembered
references etc. So one's understanding
depends on which one of one's prior
encounters one is able to assemble
during one's present interactions. This
assembling is mostly biological and done
manually. Therefore the limitations of
our working and core memories also limit
our understandings and decisions.
uh the kind of uh access and
interactivity that a medium affords
between these known and unknown elements
shapes the meaning that arises through
our interactions.
So uh you know we have uh
uh
currently you know uh we have tools that
uh
yeah so
yeah
so there are access limitations. So you
know we have two limitations. One is uh
the kind of things that we able to
retrieve and the kind of entanglements
that we are able to engage uh between
the re things. So uh for the access
limitation we can only connect uh uh
what we happen to recall in the moment
of our encounter. The vast majority of
what one has saved uh bookmarks,
playlist, reading list, photos, notes
and you know these are all on different
services uh which uh are not at almost
at all communicating with each other.
uh still latent scattered across
different services that don't talk to
each other and during our encounters we
don't have access to most of them in a
form that could help us in connection
forming work. Uh and the second
limitation is the bandwidth limitation
that is our working memories can hold
only a few things at a time. So only a
limited proportion of the sporadically
recalled things are able to interact
with one another and even the
interactions aren't as rich as possible
in other mediums. These limitations also
force us to fall back on our habits and
be guided by random engagement
maximizing and optimized algorithms. The
result is a quiet and constant underuse
of everything we have encountered and
saved before. Our resources are
fragmented across services and
underutilized even with the various
platforms.
So you know we can't go on encountering
things and searching stuff like an
amnesiac. We all have had rich histories
of beings in the world and we ought to
have a medium of interaction that can
enable the dynamic entanglement of those
histories in the present moment. Search
recommendation systems and AI systems
are
you know are useful for the specific
functions but they do not meaningfully
address this the problem highlighted.
None of these tools bring our nent
resources in contact with our present
encounter in a form that enables greater
interactivity between them and assist in
the emergence of understanding and
decision making process. you know, we
could be scrolling through YouTube, uh,
you know, and we it's a great discovery
platform. Uh, Instagram, great discovery
platform, uh, optimized for engagement,
search, you know, Google, Dr. the book.
We can search things but nowhere do we
have a tool that you that uh is that
helps you you know for for one thing
helps you build a library so that uh you
know whatever thing that you're
interacting in your life you are
listening to a podcast you really like
these two minutes and you want to mark
them you went into a bookstore uh
physically and uh you uh you want to
snap page photo yeah
&gt;&gt; this is Great to hear right now because
this is exactly one of the things I'm
trying to build. I believe it is exactly
the thing that Eric is trying to build.
I believe it is exactly the thing that
Tom is trying to build. So it's very
nice to hear this perspective and then
um what I hope we can do is talk about
the interchange and the knowledge
objects afterwards because nobody should
have to use the other person's knowledge
space but we desperately need to do what
you are such an advocate for
&gt;&gt; exchange the stuff so brilliant very
happy to hear that please please
continue
&gt;&gt; so you know so so the three um you know
I'll just keep going on on this uh over
the slides.
So I've highlighted the access and the
bandwidth. So you know currently our
access it's just uh uh because you know
you might have something very relevant
saved in your YouTube playlist but uh
currently you are in a bookstore and uh
browsing through something. You may have
stuff from your saved libraries across
different platforms that could be
relevant to your present encounter but
there is no way that you can access
those things meaningfully. So
theoretically you do have access to your
resources you do have access to your
YouTube playlist. you do have access to
your Instagram saves but even for
example you know even on these uh uh you
know bookmarks used to mean although we
call them bookmarks but bookmarks in a
physical world used to mean very
different thing you know you you had a
bookmark you just you know this and you
flip it and you know you're right there
&gt;&gt; in the in these
&gt;&gt; no no continue this bit I want to ask
you after I'm sorry I'm too enthusiastic
&gt;&gt; no it's okay you can interrupt So you
know in the in the in the digital medium
and especially you know in the services
that we have uh bookmarks
you know they reside in the background
they
are not we are not actively engaging
with those things and they are just
considered for you know a sort of uh
going back to later but that going back
to later never comes and we're not just
concerned with that part that we are
underutilizing those resources but you
know for my work I'm also a lot more
concerned about uh uh the kind of
engagements that those legend resources
can have uh during my present uh
encounter.
So uh you know even if we were able to
access for example we are able to access
all the things that uh are relevant to
you know you're shopping for a shirt and
you remember just four brands uh but you
know there are maybe you know another
four that you have right but you're just
not able to remember those. So even if
you are somehow able to surface all
those eight brands then too uh you know
there comes a magic limitation of our
working memories of how this information
is presented currently in our mediums.
Uh that does not enable a whole lot of
uh interactive engagement between you
know those various things that I'm
calling the bandwidth [clears throat]
limitation here.
Uh, so moving ahead.
&gt;&gt; No, no, no. Can I just
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yes. Yes.
&gt;&gt; Bookmarks.
So, in this thing that I've been playing
with the origami text, um, we made some
bots. Obviously, the bots are stored in
the same way that anything else. So, a
bot is inside an origami text. JSON.
The reason I'm saying that is there's no
reason a bookmark, because it was very
evocative what you said, shouldn't be an
object. rather hi Jamie
um glad you're here um Mojit is
presenting and um it's very very
interesting but we're also talking about
how to ch interchange information so how
we can have many different kinds of
things in a really simple JSON like
format such as he was talking about
bookmarks maybe an entire specification
of a bot maybe a view for how you deal
with your information all if these
things are clearly labeled as what they
are we should be able to exchange them
like a physical bookmark. So I was just
riffing on what it was saying. So thank
you.
Yeah, that that is great. Yeah.
Yeah. Because the social Yeah. The
social aspect is is really important.
Although, you know, currently because
I'm just laying the ground uh you know,
so to speak. uh but the social aspect of
how uh other people's uh information of
u connects with yours and uh those stuff
that's especially more important because
we can't have uh interesting ideas
interesting things uh just uh being uh
you know heads down looking into just
our libraries and just you know the
things that we interact with.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
So yeah this is just that you know the
thing that uh all these services and uh
so therefore our resources in them they
are they live like islands they uh there
is really just no interconnection
between them
uh
uh so you know this I think you know key
I have uh talked a little about
uh how search and uh
recommendation and AI assistance are not
able to do this. Although I um you know
all these uh systems they would be of uh
a great help uh in building this and in
uh as properties incorporated in the
proposed system.
Uh one of the things that I have
encountered is uh uh yeah before also
when I had presented uh um at uh at
Telcom company uh to a telecom company
executive was that context is merely
considered as you know this uh whole
intercon uh this whole connection
enterprise is considered as
contextualization exercise that you're
just uh you know broadening the context
but you Uh I guess you know if we look
back to those things to the first uh how
Karen Bard thinks of uh you know onic
epistemic relationships and how uh
distributed cognition and extended mind
hypothesis thinks of uh objects of
interaction and how we are processing
things then we wouldn't really be able
to say uh you know keep about concept
that our context as something merely
just broadening of a uh of a field. It's
Yeah. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; kind of in winding down. Do you have um
do do you want to talk about something
um kind of feature related because I
think we very strongly agree with your
premise.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Great. Good. So, I'll just skip
ahead. Okay. Um so, by
just a moment
uh so you know if uh I um so I'll just
read through some of the the things that
I've written I think uh uh could be good
if context were merely decorative for a
fixed object then one could compute the
single most relevant things and present
them in a rank list form but since con
context is constitutive as the object
emerges through the relationships it
enters. So ranked lists are a wrong
primitive. Instead, presenting many
ambiguous, non-ranked, navigable
connections and letting the user move
through them could be assisted in
augmenting both the capacity for
assembling relevant things and the kind
of interactions possible between them.
Following one connection would reshape
what else comes into interview. So, I
I'll stop, I guess, and Jamie wants to
say something.
&gt;&gt; Oh, thank you. I'm sorry I I had to join
late, so I I that's why I don't know
everything that's going on, but this
reminds me so much of other work that's
that's been done. All it sounds good.
Um, we, you know, Jean Tutcliffe years
ago wrote an award-winning book about
people finding information and saying
that when information is provided, it
has to be provided in the right order
for information. She was an information.
She was one of the big three in
information retrieval. So, she said you
can't just find the number one most most
relevant thing. you have to provide it
in in a sequence to prepare the the user
the reader to
understand
what they um what they're reading.
Secondly, this sounds a lot like answer
garden, that old hypertext system by um
was it a
AC acknowledg
um a block of text, a chunk, and then it
would say if you're interested in this
then read this one. If you're interested
in that, then read that. And it would it
would organize uh trying to find related
links.
Um also I we know from lots of other
work that when people read the same text
chunk a second or third or nth time,
the meaning of it has changed.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So, I mean, as I said, I joined
late today, so maybe you've you've
already covered all of this or it's it's
only um tangental to what what the
discussion is today. But I think it's
important to keep this in mind because
we sometimes in hypertext the the the
community around the conference go off
in directions that have already been
looked at extensively. Not that we've
solved any of these problems, but we
know things about this. And I believe
that I I believe context is absolutely
essential for explaining why something's
relevant, explaining the bias that's
inherent in whatever we're reading
because of course there's always going
to be some there has to be some bias
otherwise there's no there's no content
at all.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
So on that moit, uh, is it okay if I
move on while we mull?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah, I'm just going to mute
myself again.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Um, as we mull over and if you
want to give me further information to
put on the website for today, I'll be
very happy to do so. Uh, it's very
important that we build up the record.
Also, Mo, remind me, are you a Mac user
or not?
&gt;&gt; Uh, Mac.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I'll try to get you a build of
what Eric and I have been working on so
that some of this you can experiment
with putting there to extract the ideas.
So, thank you very much.
&gt;&gt; I'm going to take over the sharing for a
bit. So, uh Jamie,
&gt;&gt; I have discovered um computing with uh
Claude in Xcode. That's the big thing.
Do you use Xcode yourself?
Uh, no I don't.
&gt;&gt; Okay. I didn't until a week ago. I did
no coding. So, okay.
&gt;&gt; I mean, I I have the program. I
occasionally upload something into it,
but I've never used it for anything
serious.
&gt;&gt; Okay. No, that's cool. That's
appropriate. So, I'm going to show you
briefly all of you this app that was
made there. Then I'm going to show you
which is more interesting how it was
done. and then Eric's going to talk
about a major thing inside it. But I
want to start by saying that a key
thing. Okay, hang on. I'll just go right
over here actually. So this mess of
Windows is um Xcode. I'll just find the
right one for us to to play around with.
One second.
There. There's a good one.
So you can all see my screen, right?
So this um column here in this center
that is all I use
and I write in here as some of you saw
in the beginning of the call this is
something I wrote before a meeting today
and I say please research this person
tell me if there's a feature he has
written about that we can implement in
the software and it said yes and it did
it okay so it it is exactly like
coding in a web browser with AI, but
because it has to do it in here, it
can't just write a long list of code. It
has to use the right libraries,
procedures, all of that stuff. So, it
becomes a lot more robust. And as I said
many times, and I still can't believe
it, it even refactors automatically when
it needs to. So, it'll do a lot of the
boring stuff that even a top level
programmer just really wouldn't want to
do.
So I'm just going to make sure I can see
you guys. So this is an example
&gt;&gt; uh that was made that way. And what is
really really important I think for the
community is if you look here at the um
settings
there is a tab called open source.
You can click these two buttons. One of
them we'll just talk about the JSON
format we use which is also very open.
The other one describes this whole
software to the point where you can give
it to an AI in a web browser and say
this is the system can you design this
thing and then you describe it and it'll
give it to you and chances are it will
run
also and this is what Eric has actually
been doing. There is a setting for
modules for views
and it actually has uh swift code
already. So you can put it in your own
Xcode or
&gt;&gt; different ways where
you can easily create a view. So I I'll
show you a few views of this. It does
two things now. One is notes and one is
letters because this all started because
Eric said outside of email in the
sessions, how do you guys communicate?
So I said, "Well, I'll just have to
invent it because now we can." So this
is an application that is completely
robust and solid, but also probably
wrong. And that's really, really key and
really, really weird. All of this can be
changed. And by the time you see it next
week, it will have changed. So it's easy
for the community to change. It is not
I've built it. It's brittle. Go away.
It's the opposite. So here we have um
some stuff uh more stuff. And here you
have on the right you have the Ted
Nelson B agreeing or disagreeing with
things. All kinds of fun things below
here. It automatically does a connection
thing.
We have this called the weave. Uh this
was expressly made last week to show
off. I literally wrote
in here I said to Claude, "We're Okay,
hang on. I'll do it now. Uh, I am in a
meeting with a team. It would be good if
I can spell
I need I would like to
press.
&gt;&gt; Jamie, what's the name of your
university again?
Um, hold on.
&gt;&gt; Delhauszy. D like delta. A L H like
house. O U S I like India. E like echo.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; My lab's high coup. That's shorter.
Okay. So, uh, you probably can't read
this, Jamie, because you're on your
phone, but I said, I'm in a meeting with
the team again. I would like to impress
them with a new view. Jamie Bluestein of
Hypertext Knowledge is here at Delhausy
University based on his work. What
really cool view can you make right now?
So, it's going to go out, try to find
you, try to find your recent work,
try to find out how it relates to this
kind of hypertext, look at the
functionality we already have, and then
it's going to favor visual
impressiveness, not functionality or
usefulness or anything boring.
And then it's going to give it to us.
This could be built. Now it's being
built just because I happen to have the
whole codebase installed but it is on
git. Uh okay so this is what it's
starting. I'll read it out to you. Jamie
Bluestein let me quickly verify his
research themes. I recall wayfinding
navigation and hypertext annotation and
active reading and link quality
evaluation and didn't build the
strongest match fast since you're a
meeting now. In a meeting now.
&gt;&gt; Yep. Sounds good.
It's just I go by um something
non-gendered like they them not he him
or she her.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
So the thing here is I think we should
try to ignore the term AI because it it
kind of confuses the thing this in the
production it's literally having a top
programmer
and then the result is a normal piece of
software that may have AI in it. I mean,
right now I'm going to show you the bots
one cuz I made a I'm going to make a new
bot. Should we make an angle bot?
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; Doug
Doug Angel. Boom. Right. So, it searches
for What would I possibly mean? Why? Why
did it not do anything?
That's not cool.
&gt;&gt; Did you spell the name wrong like I so
often do?
doing a demo.
&gt;&gt; It definitely is something. [laughter]
&gt;&gt; Yeah,
&gt;&gt; that's where Okay. Well, let's just
let's I have to just run through it
again. But here's a Ted Nelson bot.
&gt;&gt; So, please note that the contents here
is mostly rubbish because we're just
testing and only Eric and I have started
sending a few actual messages.
So, here is Eric's plan for Tuesday
demo. So, Ted Nelson bot would disagree.
I've long advocated for the preservation
of human create creative works across
time, not for the technical
implementation of proprietary data
structures.
So this is what you would expect a
normal modern AI to do, right? And of
course you click through to that and
then you get the the document in
question. So bots can be here. Nothing
inherently wrong with them.
Um
okay. Okay. So what it's doing now
having researched to Jamie
&gt;&gt; and it's confirmed APIs writing new
local first uh with published to
community using the format checking the
glossery and all of that stuff. So what
while that's happening I can also tell
you that um
the thing that has been discussed a lot
the origami text format for EPUB is now
live in this. So this can publish to
EPUB in a very very simple um so if I
show you here in finder
uh no that's draft
uh published here
uh on the sorry I've been really messing
things up here. Okay here's an epub.
it'll just open in um
in Apple books, right? I'm getting a
request.
Sometimes when you do this kind of
coding, it needs your express permission
to do something in the terminal, which
is nice, bit of a safety.
So, so this is a book produced by the
system that opens in a normal EPUB
reader, nothing special, but it contains
the full metadata on the same level,
visual meta. So that means that um you
have still have paragraph level
addressibility.
Uh all that stuff is there
and that is only possible because of
this you know a few weeks ago this was
something that Vince surf and I wrote to
the ACM communications magazine an
article about as a theoretical maybe and
now I've done two different
implementations to test it. Here we go.
Um so what it's done is made something
called glossery in the sidebar. Press
run and demo it. Why this view for blue
steam? His haiku group at Delhausy is
built on reader controlled meaning
making annotation with textual glosses
personal glosseries. His 2004 ACM paper
with Mona and explicitly not
autogenerated links. The reader makes
the connections. So this view generates
nothing. I think it is the reader's
glossery projected across the community.
This is very similar to my work, Jamie.
I'm very happy to to hear that.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; So, I'm going to go full screen.
&gt;&gt; This is so much easier than than working
with WordPress.
&gt;&gt; So, here we go. Um, choose a term.
What do I do here?
How? Okay, I'm just Okay, here you go.
Bottom left. Uh, give me a term, please.
Anybody?
&gt;&gt; Hypertext.
&gt;&gt; I knew you were going to say that.
And then we have u give me a sentence
description.
&gt;&gt; Uh, text that branches at various points
allowing the reader to be in control.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I'm just going to do it that
simple. Right there.
&gt;&gt; There we have this. Um, let's just see
what it says we can do with it. We click
the term uh the adopt menu.
Oh, well,
hang on. Let's just check this.
No, that doesn't work.
I'm just going to do chocolate
food.
Oh, that's weird. The it found instantly
where I have used that term and in an
article.
So, this is about defining stuff and
finding it in the um
Well, you could try something you know
is in there like you could try Word or
Origami.
Yeah. Boom. Right there it is.
Would you like to see these glossery
terms connected visually?
&gt;&gt; Sure.
By the way, um when this kind of coding,
it's not just sent off to Claude. My
computer, which is an M4, what is it?
&gt;&gt; M4 Max with 128 gigs of RAM is now
running the fan. It's really boiling
over.
So after this little thing, we will go
over to Eric talking about the um
implementation he's working on for Ted's
um side of things. But this was
basically me showing you that coding,
it's not really coding, is it? Telling
our friend Claude while Claude is
inside. And what I mean by inside is
literally this. This is the settings
in Xcode intelligence.
Just allow it to run. You could also use
codeex from OpenAI or Gemini, but just
allow it and it does this stuff.
&gt;&gt; It is so frustrating because we got a
big warning about not being allowed to
use anything except
uh our dumbed down version of Copilot.
That's frustrating.
&gt;&gt; Oh, yes.
&gt;&gt; We need to work outside of
organizational boundaries. So, on your
home computer, you can do this.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean, I I use Kaggi for a for a
project. Um, but it wasn't
I I guess if I don't involve any any
student or or school information, I
might be able to get away with it. I
have to double check. That's where
&gt;&gt; the warnings were the morning were
really severe.
&gt;&gt; What institution are you with Jamie?
&gt;&gt; Dhousy.
&gt;&gt; Oh, that's right. You said that, right?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. They they actually demoed for us
stuff you can do with all kinds of other
systems and said, "But you're not
allowed to do this."
&gt;&gt; So,
&gt;&gt; I I have I have I have I have a coffee
date with the chief technology officer
very soon. We'll be bringing it up
again.
Yeah, I'm I'm I'm definitely skating
outside the lines at my institution at
Houston City College, but uh they're not
they're not really paying attention. So,
I when when asked recently what was the
biggest thing that HCC ever did to me
did to support my work with AI, I said,
"He's sitting over there. It's my chair
and he leaves me alone."
[laughter]
&gt;&gt; Tom, are you gonna install Xcode?
Probably not. I just don't have time to
mess with this.
&gt;&gt; No, I think you should because it'll
give you a lot of more time back because
your knowledge navigator.
&gt;&gt; I mean, I I I'm going to work another
week on this and cleaning it up because
I'm going if you guys agree, I'm going
to separate that letters thing that Eric
initially talked about away from the
knowledge of the notes. Once I have
those two apps, then Tom, you can so
easily and I'm very happy to have a
Skype call to a Skype. There you go. A
Zoom call.
&gt;&gt; You just aged yourself
&gt;&gt; to go through the initial stuff because
even though we're all technologists
here, we are in very different areas
&gt;&gt; and this can look complicated and it is
bloody not the the only
&gt;&gt; Oh, no. It's not that. it the reason I
the reason I probably not is because not
because of its complexity because it's
no more complex than working with Python
or other things like that a lot less
&gt;&gt; it's it but it's it's very uh
unidirectional because it only pushes
you out into Mac world and I need
something a little more broad-based than
that
&gt;&gt; like what
&gt;&gt; well I mean I I don't want to be
restricted in any way at this point uh
because there's a a lot of different
ways that the well once I get to the
knowledge navigator thing I've kind of
the actual coding stuff right now I've
kind of back burned a little bit because
I'm doing a lot of work on the logic and
uh so you know that may not happen and
and I'm doing a lot of testing uh of um
of the logic side of things uh so the
coding itself is probably not gonna I'm
not probably not going to do a major
code sprint until uh after Christmas at
this point
&gt;&gt; I would uh two things Tom. First thing
is
um the only thing I know you you said
you use Python but I have to say because
I think it's such a cool sentence. The
Where are you guys? I can't see you.
Hang on. I'm trying to get you back.
There you are. The only thing hard about
this kind of programming is not talking
about it all the time.
&gt;&gt; It it's that overwhelming. And if you
Here's the really key thing. If you make
a perfect Mac version or iOS version or
vision OS version,
&gt;&gt; you can then tell the system to export
the exact specification so another AI in
another platform can ingest it and
rebuild it. That's part of the magic.
&gt;&gt; Now, does that actually work? Because I
was coding with Kaggy. what whatever
special version of of somebody else's AI
Kaggy has. And I kept saying for this
visualization export exactly the
specification so when I start again I
can get the same visualization. It never
worked. There were always things that
left out or things that because they
were in natural language were somehow
ambiguous to it. The closest I got was
importing an image and saying scan this
image and change all the labels and all
the arrows but use the same style.
Have you tried have you tried it to
verify that the export works? um not for
that but what I have done is I built the
EPUB export into author and to this
&gt;&gt; I did test both versions so there were
issues with both and then we revised
both so we can do round trips but I'm
going to do one more thing and then
we're going to go over to Eric I know
we're running out of time but if you
guys are I'm certainly happy to to be
here longer so um I'm just going to it's
not alphabetical for some reason so I'm
just going to do Um,
yeah. By the way, here's here's Eric
&gt;&gt; lot of letters I could send you.
&gt;&gt; I'm going to do new author and um I'm
going to do
Jamie. Can you easily text me or send me
your um orchid ID?
&gt;&gt; Um if you go to my homepage, you can
find it.
Is it in your email signature by any
chance?
&gt;&gt; No, I think it's in my um it's on my
homepage then it's one page down from my
homepage.
Um
let me see if I can find it in my
contacts.
&gt;&gt; So So this is a bit mind expanding guys.
I'm not trying to slow things down,
trust me. So here's uh your page here.
&gt;&gt; Um Here it is. Okay. So, I copy that
and then I go I'm making a new um a new
contact entry. So, I just add
orchid ID here.
Search. Oh, I didn't didn't like the way
it was done. Hang on. I'm going to click
on the link and copy from here.
That's weird.
Will it allow me to search now? Now it
can search because it has it can do a
match. Uh, okay. Whatever. It didn't
work. But then I can do this. Um, find a
photo of you.
[clears throat]
&gt;&gt; There shouldn't be very many.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Put your head back a little bit.
I'm going to take a picture of you from
uh our chat here. I need your full head,
please, sir.
Okay. And don't move cuz the bandwidth's
bad. Going to do it. One, two. Okay.
So, this what I'm showing you now took
literally 10 15 minutes to add. Okay.
So, now I do choose a photo.
Go to the desktop. There it is.
So, it adds a little bit of a gray frame
about it because I wanted uniform
pictures of humans.
It then renders it in a cartoon style
that I have specified. There you go. Got
the hat and everything.
So, I can save that and um now you're
listed here somewhere.
Why is this not uh Yeah, there you are.
Right. So it it's a little bit of eye
candy, but it's also useful because, you
know, profile pictures are always weird,
right? So if you do something like
&gt;&gt; author,
&gt;&gt; yeah, this is,
&gt;&gt; you know, you can actually tell who
people are.
Um, yeah. So, so that was that. Now what
um Eric's going to talk about is these
views. So he's been working on a view
similar to this that is easily for
anybody, not just a coder, plug in and
plug outable. Any questions before we
hand over to Eric.
&gt;&gt; So before I
&gt;&gt; Yeah, thank you. So before I share my
screen, I just want to frame a question
for us to think about. We've seen demos
where Doug Engelbart had his emails in
NLS journal entries. Well, why don't we
have that today? And what could we build
for ourselves? How could we organize our
documents and our ideas for dimensional
navigation in XR that leverages Ted
Nelson's Zezy structure concepts? So,
that's what I want to show. Um, desktop
two.
Okay. Can you see my screen? Yes.
&gt;&gt; Okay. So, here's a bunch of emails that
I've been sending to Frod and the team
and I decided to put them into this app.
So, the this is Xcode and this is the
app the origami text running and these
are all in my drafts folder and I want
to point you to one of the emails that I
sent which is the prompt that we gave
Claude for generating a ZZ structure
view in this app. So we told it to read
this paper which is um if anybody knows
MC Shaffle from Southampton let me know.
Uh but uh this is
&gt;&gt; Monica's not there anymore but yeah
&gt;&gt; I don't I don't think she is but
&gt;&gt; All right. Well well this is a very
interesting paper because it uh
&gt;&gt; it it put Ted Nelson's ideas in graph
theory.
Okay. So we told it to read the paper
and then design a data structure to
enable dimensional navigation of a Zezy
structure and gave it some technical
details of what we wanted and what
dimensions I wanted and then Frod said I
discussed this with Claude and then he
sent this brief that Claude generated
and this is and see it mentions Eric's
tpple verbatim so it it understood what
I was saying and it created a brief
which was used as input to clawed code
and then Frod let it run for a while and
uh eventually it created this view ZZ
structure and um let me just just walk
you around it a little. So what I want
to do is go to user person and change
the xaxis to user person. And I've
recreated Ted Nelson's family tree demo.
So let's start at Elizabeth II. Now
we're on a person dimension and X. But
what's new about this? It's showing
which dimensions are connected with. So
Elizabeth has a marriage connection. So
let's put that on X. So she's married to
Phillip. And now let's uh go back to
Elizabeth and let's put her children on
Y. And she has a child named Charles who
married Diana who had William and Harry.
So we can continue expanding this family
tree. Now, so um so this is what it um
generated and um there are some things
we have to work on with cloning because
Charles has another marriage that we'd
have to represent in the system, but
this is a proof of concept. That's all I
really want to show there. Okay, so um
now
let's see. Um, so it's easy enough. Uh,
just I just want to show you what I
would do. So, say we wanted to add um,
William's wife, Katherine. Well, this is
a draft document. And you could say
anything in a document. You could say
who their children are. But what we want
to do is publish this draft. So, if I
controlclick it, I have to do an export.
And, um, it asks me some questions. is
is this a letter, RFC, personal,
whatever. Um, and you could say if it
was produced by AI, but all we're doing
is saving it as a letter. And now it is
in the publish directory. So, these are
all the things that are published. Now,
I could go to back to ZZ structure and
get back to where I was. So, but
remember this is just a first draft, but
we could do anything we want with this
now. So, let's put um the person on X
and go back down. Put the uh children,
the marriage on X and children on Y. And
there's even a Z-axis, too, which we
could use. Um you can actually navigate
it with the option and the arrows. So,
what we want to do is add William. We
want to add So, we have X has marriage
and there's an a plus sign here. So,
that's for adding. Okay. Now, look at
that. It showed my documents and we can
just find Katherine in here. Uh, let's
see. I don't see her in there, but um,
oh, there's also this linking. So, we
have to figure out how to use this. And
it has the H and I views that Ted Nelson
demonstrated.
But the point is we have defined a data
structure now which can be taken out of
this app and done in a web XR view as
well. And let me just show you um what
before I get to that I I wanted to show
you another document um that I have um
that yeah here it is.
Okay, so it's JSON data and it has an ID
for each cell. It has a slug for the
document ID and then I was able to walk
through look up the gooids and see the
contents of a document and uh then it
has the visual meta and uh then it's
really defining a zigzag data structure
with negative and positive ids and um
cells. it it enforces the rule of uh
only one connection between a positive
and a negative on any specific
dimension. So people can read this and
get an example exactly how to build this
kind of structure and many different
views can be designed against the same
data structure. If you remember the GZZ
team that built the demo that Ted
demonstrated, they had different views
of the same data and they were morphing
between them. So um yeah, so this needs
some work and uh but the next thing I
want to talk about is decentralized data
because uh right now these documents are
on Freud's machine and my machine and
we're emailing that back and forth. But
what if we could build our own
decentralized file sharing system? Well,
with Claude, I was able to build a
NodeJS application, which I call FTL
box, and it's on GitHub. I'm just going
to copy that and I'll put it in chat.
Um, so anybody can read this and to
download it, try it out. So, it's a
proof of concept for peer-to-peer file
sharing for our community, and it's
using hyper uh hyperdrives, which uh
whole punch is the company that
maintains that code now. It used to be
the DAT project a while ago, but I have
a link to the code the the chat that
generated all this code and I asked it a
lot of questions about local first
architecture because you have to think
about your threat model if you're if
where you're going to use this between
our community is not much of a threat
model. I run a uh server. It I I have a
pier that you could connect to or I
could put it on a Raspberry Pi and we
could share with each other. Okay. So,
um yeah, just some recommendations
technically, but uh and you could add
issues to this repo if you have
questions or anything. But here's a
sample session. Now, I just want to show
you the commands. This is a a command
line application. And if you learn these
commands, you can use this. And here's
just a sample session that I want to
show you what it can do. So I start it
up and the list command is showing me
which hyperdrives I have. Well, I start
with nothing. So I decide to create one
and it's on my living room Mac. So it
created a drive called from LR and it
gave me a public key. And this is the
key that I would share with my Mac
upstairs or someone else who wants to
see the files in this drive. So um then
I had a file in it uh a zip file and
then I added the contents. Okay, I had a
directory and then I added the contents
of that directory to the hyperdrive. So
the hyperdrive is versioned. So it's now
at version two. And then I told it to
seed it. So um seeding it means that it
puts it on announces it on the network
which is using a distributed hash table
and uh it's saying leave this running so
peers can connect. So while this is
acting like a server then I can go to
another machine and I could say okay I
want to register that key which just
makes it easier for me to use it in the
future. Rather than typing that key I
could give it a name. Okay. And now I
could ls to list what's in that
hyperdrive. And it tells me it's a
remote hyperdrive. That's the key. It's
at version two. One file, 34K, and it's
a zip file. Okay. So, now I can ask it
what versions exist. Well, there's
versions one and two. So, I could keep
adding to that drive, and I could go
back and pull a specific version if I
want to go back to an older version of a
document because it's an appendon log.
Okay. So, then I pull the the the
um name and I put it in my own name. So
like if Frod was pulling this he may say
from Eric and but it's so that he can
keep track of where this came from and
uh now this is what's in it like I
received that file and then I went back
to the server machine which is in the
living room and it's just a pier. Um, so
I stopped the seed and I added another
file and this is one of the documents
that Frod sent me an origami text file
and I uh put it in that from yeah I edit
it to um this from living room um
hyperdrive and I seated it again. So now
it's at version three. It announces it
on the DHT.
So anyone on the world can actually get
to my Mac or I could put this on a
Raspberry Pi because hole punch can get
through firewalls. Yeah. Go ahead.
&gt;&gt; Are you saying that we should build this
into the app? I think we should.
&gt;&gt; Well, I asked it about that. Um, see
this is NodeJS
and um it there are ways of integrating
it. We really just have to understand
how that integration would work because
you're at Mac versus it's possible. just
keep it in mind for the future. But I
think we can play with this and get a
workflow down and eventually it the app
can probably automate copying the files
to these directories and initiating a
seeding or or say you just use a
Raspberry Pi and we could automate that
in the future, but I'm just showing you
what's possible here. So now you could
check the versions you have now versions
one through three and uh I could do a
diff now and it could tell me exactly
what was changed. So I added this
document from fraud and I pull it and
now I have it in my directory and um
yeah now the diff shows I'm up to date
and just has information. So this is
very powerful if if we understand the
the the threat model that uh yeah you're
it's really peer-to-peer
sharing with each other but uh if it's
just for a small community like ours
it's possible. So you'll take questions
now. I'm going to stop share.
&gt;&gt; Sorry, I had to step to the side. I
could hear that. And yes, for a small
community like us,
I think this is definitely something we
should try because um for the first time
in history, we can
&gt;&gt; we can build stuff, throw it away. we
can share stuff, change how we share
stuff. Uh, I'm all for that. I I have a
question based on stepping back to the
previous kind of architecture. So,
in origami text, we have letters and
notes really. What I think we should do
is keep those two separate, two separate
apps. So, we have one where we message
each other and then we have the notes as
kind of a thinking space. Now that the
thinking space, knowledge space,
whatever should be able to read all of
the other things, but having just
designed the interface and gone through
it, it gets a bit messy having too much
in the same thing. You want to do a
thing in a thing, not have a mess of
menus. Eric, what do you think of that?
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I mean, you can probably add some
attributes to the data structure to
create folders or things like that.
Yeah, it's like a flat list of files
right now. Um, but I'm also thinking
zigzag can help us organize connections
between our documents. So, like with all
those emails, how many of them were
prompts to Claude that we shared with
each other, things like that.
&gt;&gt; So, you have a dimension of Claude.
Yeah.
&gt;&gt; So, here's the thing. This is kind of
fun. If I post a transcript,
&gt;&gt; then I tag it as a transcript. It's a
transcript, but it finds all your names.
But also, sometimes I want Claude to
write on my behalf, like we all do.
&gt;&gt; So then I post it as
&gt;&gt; by Claude posted by Frogland.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I saw that.
&gt;&gt; So it has both attributions. So you can
sort it up either, but as a claude
statement, but I'm the reason it's here
because also Tom, some of the things you
wrote in emails while testing. I posted
it as a letter to the community as Tom
by Frod Hegeland as in it's clear that I
did it. So if I'm lying, everybody knows
I'm lying. It's just that we can get
content in there.
Or or maybe you want to put Socrates in
there or whatever. So yeah, that makes
sense, Eric.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. So I think we just need to
dream about this a little bit like what
could be done here and then how could
this be taken into XR.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Uh yeah I mean as you're talking
now I just uh asked uh my dear friend
Xcode to uh build a new this is a really
important example. So I asked it to
build a new app called knowledge space.
Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Nothing existed other than an entry in
the app store which is empty. I said
take the code from origami text that
deals with notes because I'm going to
leave the letters. So again talking like
a human to it. So now it's going to give
me that infrastructure. So that means
that uh Tom if you ever do want to do
Xcode stuff you may want to take this
I'll put it on git. uh you walk through
Xcode and you say steal all of code for
this, but I want it to be called the um
I want it to be called knowledge
navigator.
&gt;&gt; Absolutely appropriate to do.
&gt;&gt; The only thing I hope we can do together
is, you know, I've designed a format
origami text.json.
I'm not a genius in that space. I expect
in our community it may be changed so
much it'll be completely different in a
short while. Fine. But at some point we
have to settle on something to
interchange. So Moheit's context, Eric's
distributed list, Tom's knowledge
navigator and so on. We can send stuff
to each other,
right? I mean, it is absurd how little
we can send to each other now.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And go back to Engelbart's vision
where you had all your emails in a
journal. you could reference them, point
out a paragraph and yeah, [laughter]
&gt;&gt; yeah, I mean, this is exactly the kind
of stuff I've been doing. So, it it's
really wild because it only came
together today. So, I had this meeting
with Dave Millard in Southampton and let
me just show you the simplicity of it
here on my phone. So, I have a little
app that is supposed to be for voice
notes. When I open this, right, super
simple. I just press the microphone
So now I am No, I pressed the wrong
button.
&gt;&gt; Is this a standard Apple thing? Because
I use that sometimes.
&gt;&gt; Uh, it's not. It's similar to a standard
Apple thing, but I built it so it
produces two outputs. One output is what
I'm saying now goes in my normal Apple
calendar under this minute. So I can go
through my calendar and see the notes.
For instance, now I'm talking about how
great this meeting is. It also attaches
the location and it goes into my origami
text tool.
So I'm going to change it so it goes
into my knowledgebased tool. But the
fact that it tags it by location and
time properly, the stuff we in our
community have talked about timelines
for decades now,
&gt;&gt; technically trivial interface r still a
challenge. So now we can do it. Mhm. I'm
just ju just an idea occurred to me when
you're talking about the location, it's
going to be your your geographical
location. It's not going to be I'm in
this meeting. I'm in this seminar. It's
going to be I'm in this room in this of
my house.
&gt;&gt; That is a challenge, Jamie.
Well, as I said, it only to it only
occurred to me just this instant, but
it's it's something we should think
about. I don't know how much of a
priority though,
&gt;&gt; Jamie. That's my revolutionary thought.
Sorry, I just took a dropped it. The
fact that we don't know
now,
let's find out what would it mean. How
would we be able to tell it
that we're on a Zoom call? Maybe
it has to check our calendar already.
&gt;&gt; If we're on a scheduled Zoom call, tag
that in. But if you see the um my
screenshot here that I just put in the
chat.
&gt;&gt; Even though I was on my iPhone, it's
already bloody there. Come on. How
insane is that?
And what's going to be really scary is
if you can search for the things that
the FBI record that when the FBI was
eased dropping.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And others. Um, hang on.
&gt;&gt; Well, no, you need to filter out which
organization was listening to which
parts.
&gt;&gt; That's funny. I just asked this to
Wait, wait, wait.
I'm building an app that hasn't been
Oh, this is exciting. Uh, hang on.
Origami text open. See if it works.
&gt;&gt; All right, check this out.
&gt;&gt; So, you see the on the left here, right?
That's the origami text icon, which is a
square, but it almost looks like a
folded envelope or folded. I put it 90°
45 90 45 degrees or whatever. I made it
knowledge base icon. Here it is.
&gt;&gt; Great.
&gt;&gt; I just This was just happening in the
background. Simple prompt. Here are all
my notes. Same folder. Still works. This
is what I just said.
Oh, or is this what I just said? I don't
even know how it's listed it.
But but it goes here. And for some
reason it has back links to Nelson bots.
I don't know if we want that. So we we
can deal with this. This is completely
empty beginning.
&gt;&gt; Kind of wild, right?
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; If you looked here, you see it says the
address for the city. This is Norway a
few days ago. Yesterday.
&gt;&gt; Mhm. So when I was driving up from um
Southampton now in the car,
I can see on the map what village I was
closest to.
So look at all this metadata that you
can collect and then think about how
Zigzag can organize that metadata as you
navigate.
&gt;&gt; Exactly. Exactly. The the opportunities
now are amazing. And
&gt;&gt; why is she
&gt;&gt; Eric? I'm very very grateful that you
joined us to prod us and also product
us.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Um
obviously we're a little bit over time
just a touch. Uh Tom
just going to detour to you for a
minute.
Uh obviously you would like your
knowledge navigator to be available not
just in the closed Apple ecosystem
&gt;&gt; and you want it to have incredibly
strong capabilities. Now one of the
things Mojit has been really pushing on
if I understand you Moheit and this has
been my realization over the last few
days I think I've basically it took me a
while to understand your first
presentation Mo point is we would like
relevant information to come to us
&gt;&gt; not to have to go to it
&gt;&gt; right
it sounds like an easy thing to say but
when you are dealing with a piece of
information through easy action you
should be able to see other things in
your like other things in the world pro
and con you should be able to navigate
around it right would you like to talk a
little bit about how your dreams are for
this Tom and then see how it fits with
Eric and Mo
&gt;&gt; and of course you'll be part of this too
so also in relation to you sorry please
go on top
&gt;&gt; no I mean uh I actually found Moheit's
talk very much in alignment with the
kind of thinking I'm I'm doing in terms
of this Um
the term relevant information is not a
fixed concept. You know what's relevant
today may not be relevant tomorrow or or
you know and and what's important is
constantly shifting. And this is this is
the fundamental problem we have with
information management is knowing what's
important, what's not. We spend an
incredible amount of time hunting uh
through data sources to trying to find
that nugget of important information.
Um
I'm pretty good at it myself. Uh but
even there I feel like I'm missing so so
much in terms of just anything I'm
looking at. You know, there's always
another layer. There's always more
stuff.
So the idea behind the knowledge
navigator is to provide you with a
picture of information that shows you
patterns that um help you figure out
what's relevant and what's not or what's
important and what's not and where those
connections are and you know so um
recently I worked with I was working
with Claude and it kind of reframed the
the priority and and basically it said
for the clustering aspect of it so the
idea would be you'd feed in the docu the
information the documents and it would
look for clusters of information that's
a strong connection
uh issue right so those connection it's
looking for stronger connections there
but if I also want to say okay I have
this body of work or this project that
I'm working on and I'd like to see if
anybody else is working on this and so
maybe it reaches out and it says oh look
Moheit's done this thing or this thing
or so on and so forth uh that it will
then find that. Now, that's a weak
connection issue, right? So, that's a
that's a that's kind of the opposite. I
may actually end up putting a switch in.
Uh although I I'm still thinking through
the logic on this a bit. Um
and the idea is that the AI is
generating the chat the the the language
model is the one that's generating the
connections and presenting me with
options.
Uh, it's not that I'm putting my, you
know, I can do this already in terms of
mind mapping and stuff like that, but
then I'm putting my finger on it and I'm
the one who's determining what's
important and what's not. And if I have
a blind spot, I'm going to miss
something. And uh, you know, there are a
lot of people with a lot of blind spots
in this world. [laughter]
And um, there are a lot of companies
with a lot of blind spots. And education
and learning is all about overcoming
your blind spots and understanding that
you have them in the first place. Uh if
you ever want someone who is
intellectually very confident of
themselves, talk to a three-year-old. Uh
they, you know, but they have no
conception of what their blind spots
are, you know, because they're like, I
know everything, you know, at this
point. So um
and some people remain that way for the
[laughter]
I wasn't going to go there. especially
since this is recorded. Um but uh uh but
yeah, I mean that's sort of the idea is
that um you have the the complexity of
the truth thrown in your face
&gt;&gt; and you have to come up with the
reasoning to do that.
&gt;&gt; You in a way are at exactly the same
spot in our lives because on this side
of the fence I just made an empty shell
called knowledge space.
working on your knowledge navigator.
Right now, we're at the point where
&gt;&gt; when you open up the app,
&gt;&gt; stuff can be there. So, if you actually
do the Xcode and whatever AI you want,
&gt;&gt; you know, I can give you this original
code or not, whatever you want, but you
can actually say what you just said, but
in fact, this is recorded. There will be
a transcript.
&gt;&gt; I can send you the quote via this format
to you. You can give that to an AI
inside
&gt;&gt; and it will build you what you just
said. It, as I've said many times, it
may do it wrong. Then you tell it what
you want to change.
Once it works, whether or not it can be
given to another AI like Jamie was
talking about earlier, might not work to
a degree. It doesn't matter because this
becomes an very very affordable, not
free, affordable, incredible prototyping
tool for ideas. Sure.
Sure. I you know and that and that's
great. Um
my big thing right now is that
I have come to the realization that the
questions that the AI essentially or the
model asks itself andor the questions
that the humans ask of the model are an
extremely important part of the process
and that they can't simply be factually
based. They have to be uh reasoning
based. And so what I'm trying to build
right now is um what I call the
reasoning loop where you you can
basically check your own thinking. Uh
and the idea being that you would upload
a chat log for instance. And that my my
one of the things I'm going to do with
my students next semester is I'm going
to have them upload a chat log into this
reasoning loop and then have it give
them an analysis of the level of
thinking that they're doing. Uh but you
could see anybody doing that, right? And
so the question is to the extent that
I'm looking at maybe folding that into
the knowledge navigator.
It's also given me an idea for another
product altogether which is to build a
custom reasoning LLM that's basically
something you could sell to schools that
would that all it would do is
essentially work at reasoning levels,
right? And um so uh I don't I don't know
which way that's going to go yet. So, I
I'm trying to, you know, I I I have kind
of backed off on the pressure on myself
to complete the knowledge navigator uh
uh quick and dirty um and and said, you
know, I I want to think this through
because it could really change a lot of
things, not just learning, but also just
in general people's ability to do
self-reflection and to be able to work
in an AI environment because this is
what sets us apart from the AIS is that
higher level thinking. And if we can do
that, then we're in we'll be much better
shape than if we can't. And the problem
is that most of our education is very
much on the um the uh uh the know the
information slot machine model. You
know, give you tell me a question, I
give you a piece of information. And
that's how we treat the AIS. You know,
you know, tell me tell me what the
tallest building in the world is. So, an
ironic question to you, Tom, would be
what you just talked about now, have you
discussed it with your AI?
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; Have you have you gotten to the point
where Okay, what you use Claude as well,
right?
&gt;&gt; Yes, I use Claude and Gemini. I go back
and forth.
&gt;&gt; Why don't we do this right now?
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
Go to your Dare Claude or Shannon as I
like to call it and say um you know your
friend is bugging you to build a tool
based on our discussions. What would the
spec be for another AI to build my
dream?
Okay,
&gt;&gt; these meetings used to be two hours, by
the way, which is what we're up against
now.
&gt;&gt; Uh that do you guys started at 10:30?
&gt;&gt; Half an hour earlier. That's probably
better for Mojit.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. What time is it where you are
Mojit?
&gt;&gt; At 10:30. It's okay, guys. It's okay.
&gt;&gt; Oh, that's not too
&gt;&gt; We can continue. Yeah. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
Um,
it it's funny because uh when I go out
and walk early in the mo morning, we
have a lot of uh of South Asians in the
uh in in the neighborhood now and
they're all out on their phones because
it's like the perfect time to call
India. [laughter]
Anyway, so say that again, Froto, what
you said in terms of the prompt. My
friend is bugging me to
&gt;&gt; actually build this. actually build the
knowledge
navigator.
&gt;&gt; As far as you understand from our
discussions,
could you present me with a spec I can
give to an AI template?
AI chatbot. Is that what you said?
&gt;&gt; No, just an an AI to implement.
&gt;&gt; Oh, to implement
&gt;&gt; if you want to with the result share a
screen. That could be fun. Or whatever
you prefer.
&gt;&gt; No, it's fine.
Problem is I have multiple um chats
going on at the same time.
&gt;&gt; [laughter]
&gt;&gt; So hopefully I picked the right one.
This is exciting.
[laughter]
It's kind of weird, isn't it? Do Do you
guys also use Clone the rest of you?
&gt;&gt; No.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I have it installed, but I'm not
using that.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; But I should Yeah. Yeah. A a very weird
thing is to see that little spinner and
the text in someone else's world. It's
almost like an intimacy intrusion. You
know, this is how we now some of us see
our intimate thoughts back and forth.
And now I'm like staring into Tom's
brain and you know, he's not sure what's
going to be spat out. And it's all very
very exciting. [laughter]
&gt;&gt; Well, I'm I'm not sure about that even
when I'm not using a large language
model,
[laughter]
but that makes it fun.
I'm not at all.
&gt;&gt; So you're on. I see.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I'm well I I'm I'm running Sonnet
just because the level of thing that I'm
working with right now it it it it does
just fine for that. And if I run Opus, I
start running out of tokens too fast
before I can finish the conversation. To
me, having the longer conversation is
worth it.
&gt;&gt; I think you should um
[laughter]
Okay, let's see what it says.
&gt;&gt; [snorts]
&gt;&gt; Interesting.
[laughter]
See, it is my head.
Um,
&gt;&gt; yeah. I mean it it's just um so so this
coding in Xcode with an AI makes me feel
like I'm 20 years old.
&gt;&gt; It means the future.
&gt;&gt; No, I know. I can tell.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And and honestly, playing with AI
makes me feel like I'm 20 years old in
college and I have a faculty of of uh
professors that I can go bug at any
time, you know, and uh because I I
treated college very differently than
most people do. I will I will say that
very clearly in the sense that uh
&gt;&gt; I I looked at it as a learning adventure
and uh not not as something that I had
to get past me to get a degree or
anything like that. And that's I have
learned to much to my sugarin that
almost no one else thinks about it that
way.
My mother my mother it's my mother's
fault. She went to college for the hell
of it when she was 40. And uh she
actually graduated better than I did
because she wasn't partying with her
friends in the same way, although she
did have young children. Um
yeah, I'm also thinking about uh sorry
I'm just putting Mo's slideshow on
there. Where's the copy? He got anyway.
I'll do that after. It's also that
since we can build now, it's a great
 detector.
You know, are we just ruminating or or
are we doing something? So, why don't
you have a skim through that, Tom, and
see if it reflects your situation.
&gt;&gt; I was just going to share it here if you
guys want to see.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, it's the same as on the side.
Yeah. Yeah, this is perfect.
by just sharing the markdown.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Uh yeah, I know.
&gt;&gt; Uh
H yeah I mean this is giving me a
completely different viewpoint on it
again it isn't looking at the code that
we've already built either although I
would say the code that we've already
built is largely
uh functional in the sense of just
taking uh documents and turning them
into the um
into a graphic and um but also in theory
doing it randomly.
&gt;&gt; Yeah,
I think there is a need for some slow
thinking when you're looking at projects
of this scope. Like take this think
about it for a day. And then you'll come
back in the morning. You may want to
modify what it wrote before you submit
it. Yeah,
&gt;&gt; I think a day is still not slow enough.
[laughter]
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I agree.
&gt;&gt; Sometimes this takes months to
percolate.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And and I'm kind of in the in the um
verification mode because I'm learning
new things about how other people think,
which is something that's always been
kind of a a black box for me. And so,
um, which is a real liability as a
teacher. Um, but, uh, the the being able
to read other people's thinking through
their chat logs is really an interesting
experience and something that I, you
know, I it's it's a it's something that
I've wanted for 20 years in a sense
because I see the end product of what
they build, but I'm never I'm like, how
the hell did you get here? You know, I
was like, [laughter] you know, and that
happens all the time. But now I can look
at the chat logs and also but the now
the next step is can I get them to
create their own loop where they're
looking at the chat logs in a critical
way and thinking about their thinking
and learning how to think better. And
that I think is how many times can I use
think in one sentence? um h that I think
is really absolutely critical not only
for students learning to operate in the
world that we live in today but also for
current professionals who've been handed
an AI and told hey use this right like
Jaime's institution you know or don't
use this and and and without you know
the people who are making the policies
clearly haven't thought through the
reasoning behind those policies and I
see this all the time and um and but you
know it there's so many different layers
to this. I mean it's everything from uh
but we've got to get at that high level
that creative level of thinking in order
to be able to move the ball forward. And
this group is a very operates at that
level a lot. Uh and uh but most groups
don't you know [laughter] I will say
that with a with a high degree of
certainty. Most of the other meetings I
participate in are not that
self-reflective in terms of well, we're
doing this because we've always done
this.
Well, it's not a good reason.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. [laughter] I think there's a need
to structure the environment and
situations that you're giving these
students so that they're motivated to
want to think at a higher level certain.
Yeah, it's a tricky,
&gt;&gt; right? The real challenge is that
especially in the online anytime classes
is I don't I I don't have that time with
them.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I know.
&gt;&gt; Because they're I never actually see
them. And so, um I've noticed a a
divergence in success rate between my
online anytime and my the classes where
I actually have interactive sessions.
There's there's a significant it's like
50% you have a 50% higher chance of
passing if you're if you're in in
something that has either the Zoom class
or an inerson class than if you take an
online anytime class. It's that much.
And so what I'm trying to do and the
other thing is as a manager if you're
dealing with a large company and you're
like okay I got to get everybody up to
speed on this. You can't tell them to
think. You have to have a mechanism for
showing them, training them to think,
right?
&gt;&gt; And so that's kind of what the objective
of of of this part of the project is.
The knowledge navigator is a tool for
thinking to show you these connections
in a way that um you know that that
Nelson and Angelbart were talking about.
And so um the
that's just that's a visualization tool.
Um, but now I'm thinking also about as a
thinking a much more clear a much more
targeted thinking tool. Then you can use
the knowledge navigator once you've
figured out what to do with it. Yes,
&gt;&gt; I'm just certainly I I saw you back.
Hang on.
Boom. Okay. Um,
my train of thought was as follows
because obviously I'm living in my
world. If your students had to
communicate using letters as in the
digital JSON letters that we have
what might be interesting is because
they the way it's set up right now is
it's mostly based on replies.
&gt;&gt; So if I pick up one of Eric's letters
&gt;&gt; I can just reply but it's just as easy
to say agree disagree a few basic link
types. Right?
What if at the point of sending the
system looks at the original what I
wrote and gives it a bit of an analysis
and says spot on or what are you on
about
&gt;&gt; that doesn't have to be adhered to but
it may help the student privately
reflect it's rubbish not publicly so
they can go back and edit the letter and
then send it like a pre-flight logical
pre-flight
Yeah, except that I think uh certainly
for the student perspective, but I I
think anybody who's trying to learn, you
want to do a post-flight in a sense
because if you do a pre-flight, they
don't understand why it's telling them
to do.
&gt;&gt; No, no, they write the reply, but as it
as they send it, the citizens say, "Hang
on, let me have a look at this."
&gt;&gt; And then they say, "Yeah, this is
brilliant. I'll send it to the teacher
or whatever." Well, hello, Jamie. That
is the coolest background. Hi, I'm in my
office.
&gt;&gt; Hi. We usually don't go on this late, so
I'm glad you came back.
Um
yeah, I mean I don't again I part of
part of the objective here is to get
people uh to think at this level. You
know maybe maybe down the road as a tool
I could see that but at this point I'm
trying to get people to think uh outside
themselves to think critically in a way
that we always talk about in education
but never actually accomplish.
Um because at the end of the day it's
only a question of what do you want me
to say? [laughter] Like I want you to
think for yourself please. I'm always
reminded one of my favorite scene in all
the movies is that scene from Life of
Brian where he's standing out over the
crowd and you know he's trying to
convince them that he's not the Messiah
and uh he says you're all different. And
one guy goes I'm not.
just like
um
&gt;&gt; yeah and so uh and that really kind of
makes your head spin a little bit but I
get that right I'm trying to say tell to
my students you're all different and
they're all saying no we're not
[laughter]
just just give us the grade and pass us
on our way leave me alone and um and
that's that's very common because
they've been trained into that and but I
also think that the most the workers in
the world today have gone through that
educational system and some of us break
out of that doom loop and a lot but most
people don't and so they are much more
willing to accept the orthodoxy whether
that's coming from a political leader or
from their manager. You know, it makes
sense in an industrial environment that
everybody is walking in lock step. And
it makes sense that the that that uh
movements like Nazism and and communism
as it existed under the Soviet Union
came out of an industrial mindset
because everybody's moving in lock step.
I mean, that's really the point uh
politically. And so um uh but we do it
here too. I mean, management theory in
the United States, in the a lot of parts
of most of the world, comes from Ford.
And Ford based their management theory
on their assembly line. And so, it
should come as no shock that instead of
producing Model T's, we're producing
memos. But it's the same goddamn thing
most of the time, right? And so that's
that's the part where I'm trying to
break the training because school is
very much education is also we produce
students in the way that we used to
produce that we produce cars and uh and
that's
students aren't cars people aren't cars
and we you know and and if if you can if
they're all automated all the time those
are the jobs that AI is going to eat for
lunch because AI can do that too you
know if they're only ever operating at
those low levels of thinking. So really
what I'm the goal here is not so much
the work itself but it's the mechanism
of the work to get their brains to
operate at a different level. And this
is true whether I'm talking about
training industrial people who are in
you know companies and stuff. It's also
true though about uh training students
and I also realize how incredibly
disruptive that is to the system and um
how much resistance from a systemic
perspective that's going to engender
which is another reason why I want to
automate and I'll say to people here
here's a tool you want to be successful
in this world use this tool don't listen
to your boss don't listen to your other
professors use this tool and when you
can think for yourself then you're going
to have a much better shot at it uh if
if you if you just sort of blindly
follow along, I can't help you. And
that's that's that's why
uh I mean again, I study a lot of
systems theory, too, but that's also why
this this is designed to work in the way
that it does. Um
and I initially started with the
knowledge navigator as a tool for
visualizing information in a creative
way. it built, you know, it's it's built
for me [laughter] in many ways because
I'm like, I want to see these worlds in
a different way. And I've done it
myself, but it's very labor intensive to
make a concept map uh of all of the
things. And you're always going to miss
stuff and you're always going to bias it
because of who you are. And so you're
going to immediately go and when I've
done this for other people, I have to
make judgment calls about this is
important and this isn't. and and that
may not may may be perfectly logical to
me but not necessarily logical to them
and uh so that's you know that's where
this all came from where the knowledge
navigator all came from but what I've
realized in the interim I mean I've
already got a knowledge navigator it's
just textbased this is my knowledge
navigator it has its flaws it's
difficult to keep track of all the
threads but I can literally sit down
here and say tell me how this relates to
&gt;&gt; augmenting human intellect and it
Right. And or or
&gt;&gt; zigzag.
&gt;&gt; So here's the exciting bit.
&gt;&gt; There is a difference between tell me
and show me.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; So
&gt;&gt; I agree.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I know you agree because I've seen
your visualizations. There's a lot of
stuff. It's not it's certainly not a
chatbot thing, right? So um I'm going to
try to build it now.
[laughter]
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; I'm gonna try to build it as a view.
Um,
&gt;&gt; as a what?
&gt;&gt; As a view.
&gt;&gt; A view. Okay. I understood as a beer.
&gt;&gt; So, let's have because there's a few
things going on here. So, I I've created
knowledge space
have to allow based on what was in
origami text, but I'm removing things,
adding things, blah blah blah. Here I am
um I just added to origami text
uh to change. Hang on. I just want to be
able to see you guys. Okay, there you
are.
Um yeah, I'm it's changing a lot of
stuff based on very simple prompts. So I
hope that uh within not too many
seconds.
Okay, let me just as an example of how
this works.
I have told the
system that
the iOS version of Origami text should
no longer take notes. All it should do
is show incoming letters and let you
reply to them.
So, it's doing all of that by itself
now, right? Crazy. Once that's done,
because I wasn't very clever with
timing, going to click a button. And I
said, can you make a view based on this?
It's from Tom in the group. It should be
called K Navigator or Kav. I just don't
want it to be your name because it isn't
yours in the sense that I am just
stealing your idea right now. I don't
want to pretend that
&gt;&gt; but this is all going on YouTube.
[laughter]
&gt;&gt; Yeah, but what I mean is, you know, if
you like it, take it. But I'm not going
to pretend that this is the real Tom H.
&gt;&gt; So
&gt;&gt; I I don't know what that is. I don't
know what the real Tom H is anymore
either. So, you know,
&gt;&gt; I think I know. We can run a diff.
[laughter]
&gt;&gt; There you go.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So, while we're waiting, I just
wanted to comment on what you said about
how important it is to show and yeah,
the visual aspect of it.
&gt;&gt; Well, one day headsets will be really
cheap and everyone will have one. And
why are we in Zoom in boxes? What could
that become if it was 3D XR and we could
see each other in a 3D space and show
our knowledge sculptures to each other
and then point out well this is what
where my thinking comes from. You point
out where your thinking comes from and
we have a conversation.
&gt;&gt; That's what that's the potential of
this.
&gt;&gt; Oh, absolutely. Yeah,
&gt;&gt; I know. I I'm trying to get it to work
in 2D and then I I'll give it to Frodo
and he can make it work in 3D. Mhm.
&gt;&gt; No, no, but that's that's the insane
magic of this. I mean, Eric, what you
talked about there is partly uh we had
two years of Sloan supported work.
Sorry. Sure. Hey,
&gt;&gt; what? Sorry, I'm getting a piece of
chocolate. Come say hi.
&gt;&gt; Hi.
&gt;&gt; Hi, Edgar.
&gt;&gt; Wow. So much bigger.
&gt;&gt; That's crazy, isn't it?
&gt;&gt; Yes.
I'm just um going to show you this.
So, I've just um changed the whole thing
and uh what's going on?
&gt;&gt; Do you have any idea how many tokens
this is munching?
&gt;&gt; No, I don't. But I may very well get a
receipt for £50 more of money spent.
&gt;&gt; Oh, goodness.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean, right now, um I've decided
need your cash flow or something. I
don't know. I I I'm very cheap when it
comes to my AI usage.
[laughter]
&gt;&gt; Well, that's because we are in different
stages. I mean, right now,
&gt;&gt; yeah,
&gt;&gt; I have I've just decided that um
I just have to invest, right? By the
way, so here this the app that you saw
earlier doing notes now just shows
letters,
right? And the notes is going over to
the other thing. So, click on one
reply. Yeah, basically the functionality
is here madness, right? Because the
compon we somebody Tom [clears throat]
last week said um talked about systems
thinking.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; That is of course what this is right
when anybody in you know when I as so
I'm just moving my phone tip somewhere.
I make the point that with a modern
camera, you can make a 24 million pixel
image at, you know, moving your finger
just a little bit. So what you still
have to choose the right camera, the
lens, the perspective, the processing,
the subject, the lighting, all of that
stuff. Same with this.
You know, you can move the code all
around, but you have to understand what
code meaning code as in a block you
have, what kind of data you have. Still
need to know all of that stuff.
other otherwise and that's totally
legit. There's nothing wrong with making
a personal app for the individual that
is absolutely rubbish for anyone else.
Totally fine.
But if you're trying to have a
community, you need to figure out the
system both technical social networking
and so on that makes it go together. So
this is still hypertext as far as far as
I'm concerned.
&gt;&gt; Key is that those personal apps have to
share the same data.
&gt;&gt; If we Yeah. So if you can make that
happen and you have your local first
technology for replicating data to each
other, we could all plug in our own
specific views of it however we need.
&gt;&gt; Well, the thing I find really
&gt;&gt; a lot of files. Do you mind sending me a
lot of files?
&gt;&gt; Who me?
&gt;&gt; No, no, Eric.
&gt;&gt; Oh, of the ones you already have so we
can populate. So when we open your view,
Tom, we got more stuff.
&gt;&gt; All right, hold on.
&gt;&gt; Thanks. So, I was going to say in
response to what Eric just said, though,
is that I think file types are
going to disappear over time because
they're a legacy of uh um of linear
binary digital thinking as opposed to
squishy thinking which the AI is much
more likely to to digest because I can
throw any kind of fi file into an AI, it
doesn't care. you know, I can't do that
with Microsoft Word or anything else.
And I see you shaking your head, Frod,
but I
&gt;&gt; I think it's really important
to be able to own a piece of knowledge
that you can literally stick on the
wall.
&gt;&gt; Oh, no. I'm not saying that. I'm saying
files in the sense of incompatible file
types. I mean, I think it's what we're
talking about is going to be code is
code and text is text. Not, you know,
we've gotten so used to you have to
format things in a certain way in order
to get them into this application and
not have it mess it up, right? That uh
that that I think that world is going
away. It's already gone away to a
certain degree because of the
universality of, you know, XML and
things like that. And uh you know, I can
dump a word file into claude. It doesn't
care. It reads the XML and you know
and Bill Gates can't lock it out.
&gt;&gt; No, I agree. And and this is why I'm so
fighting for Jason. Um the only thing
that I want to contribute to Jason is at
the end of it, please just put the
metadata down and tell us what it is.
That's it. You know, translators are
easy if the data is clear. So
uh
&gt;&gt; so here we go.
This is what it built. Do you want it to
be changed to be something different
like maybe more graphical or anything
like that?
&gt;&gt; Are you asking me?
&gt;&gt; Yes, because this is yours.
&gt;&gt; Oh,
&gt;&gt; well, I mean, so what are you going This
is This is going to convert this into a
U. Just hit go. See what it does.
Well, that's that's what it does. So,
uh I'll just read it a bit of it. Kab is
in the sidebar. It implements on spec
faithfully within the app's constraints.
Everything on device, nothing generated,
every result carrying its reasoning
trace as a first class output.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; So, the unit of content, the library
decibel paragraph, the formats answer
this one. Substantial paragraphs only
kept at 30 per document.
relationship space Apple's ondevice NLE
embedding NL embedding sentence
embedding the truncation threshold is a
live slider pairs at or above whatever
form of cluster does such thing bridge
detection sketch reasoning okay uh I'm
going to ask can you
also make this
an interaction
More like hang on
more like uh
oops
I think there may be another thing
building there. Let me just check.
What is this? Lisa. Okay. Yeah, Lisa was
having some problems. We don't need to
worry about this.
Uh okay. This is good.
knowledge space.
So while that is working on that we can
see
I've told it to build
that's building installing installing
build product
loading.
Now you should see that kind of
microphoney type interface.
There it is. So I have to allow
location.
I have to give it my name to be used for
tagging. I'm sure we can do something
more elegant with that.
Set to my first name lowerase. That's
not useful.
Right. Done.
So upload um augmenting human intellect
and see how it intersects with all of
the interchanges you and Eric have had.
&gt;&gt; That's
&gt;&gt; Can you show that visually?
&gt;&gt; Uh hang on. Let me just I'm just going
to find a folder here. So this is all
synced together.
Uh how do I I'm in the open dialogue
box. Okay. iCloud
&gt;&gt; or you can just go to it at
douglart.org.
[laughter]
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So, I just sent a bunch of emails
to Fro. Yeah, the email has all the
origami documents for my emails that
I've sent over the past week or two.
&gt;&gt; This is a quick test of the knowledge
space on iOS recording and notes.
&gt;&gt; Right. Uh, let's take that.
&gt;&gt; So, for Tom's question, like anytime I
reference the concept of angelbart, it
might match it to something in augmented
human intellect. Is that what you're
trying to see? Yeah, I'm putting these
that you just sent into origami text
directly.
&gt;&gt; Right.
&gt;&gt; And um I'm going to open origami text so
inbox. I got these from you.
&gt;&gt; Yep.
&gt;&gt; Here they are. Uh so this is now the
thing about augmenting human intellect
is
that is a a document not a letter. And I
don't mean that to be correcting you
because uncertainly that's not what I
mean. What I mean is in the environment
of what this is
something that is a like an academic
paper or something you're done with is
an EPUB origami epo
something brief because it has more
metadata. It can have images. It can
have all kinds of goodies inside it. The
letters between Eric and me right now
are just plain text and JSON. So I can
do what you said.
I'm also dang I misspelled that. I saw
something is asking. There we go.
So let's just say um
okay I'll just copy the whole thing
and uh I don't know how this is going to
go.
gonna go.
&gt;&gt; Like if you downloaded a PDF of that,
could it get the text out of that PDF?
&gt;&gt; It could, but it would be horrible.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Make a U. Can I still do? Yeah. Okay.
I'll do notes secretly up here.
I'm just going to delete some uh
&gt;&gt; yeah even get the
&gt;&gt; Okay, so the whole thing this is not an
editor
yet. So sometimes it deletes the wrong
thing and stuff but I here we have
&gt;&gt; some of it.
Okay, that's a lot of stuff. So, I'll
just
export that. So, that means it's now
still going to be in the origami text.
And I'm going to call it a note because
it is a note.
And we'll go back here.
I'm going to go to um
I'm just going to see what's being built
right now. Done. Kab as a wave
presentation.
All
right. So, I'm going to run it on the
same set of information now that we have
the new Eric messages. Sorry. And we
have um that document with a lot of good
dev stuff.
I'm getting all these pop-ups now,
right? So, that's kind of cool. But
then,
um I'm going to click on weave. I have
no idea what's going to happen. And are
you all as excited as I am? I hope so.
Here it is.
So, here's augmenting human intellect.
How it relates to all these other
things.
And of course, you can double click on
any one of them
maybe. I mean right now this is
completely useless obviously
that this is deterable. So maybe we want
to be able to have something in the
middle right.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean the idea would be now that
you have the weak link you cluster.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And the
K nav
uh puts a um
text entry field in the where where
should it be? at the top
at the top
before
All right, for the record. So I said in
the K now nav put a text entry field at
the top for the list weave option and on
enter put the text in the middle of the
weave and show connections to that. Now
from that to the documents and the
weave,
right? This is just let's see what
happens kind of stuff, right?
Are you guys reading the description of
the um weave and cape? It's all here if
you want to read it.
&gt;&gt; Is weave something you created?
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; So, it's using the it's using the
paragraph level of the document to weave
concepts. Is that right?
&gt;&gt; I think so. But um how did I create the
weave? In a meeting recently with some
of you guys, I said um I'm in a meeting
now. God impressed the guys. Make
something [laughter] really
spectacularly visual. It doesn't have to
be useful.
And it did that. Now we're trying to
make it useful. Ruining the whole point.
Not necessarily.
You have to have a pile of wood before
you can start building a table. Right.
&gt;&gt; True. I mean, you guys have um
so in terms of visual power,
check check this out. I don't think
Jamie has seen it. So, I I built this. I
had an iPad app many years ago that was
just a globe. You move it across and
there's nothing. But if you tap on
something, it'll show you the border.
It's to help you learn a bit of
geography because you can't really learn
when it's already labeled, right?
So uh I redid that. Here you get uh
borders within you get cities and you
know you click to hide it.
Click to bring it back. That was the
original. This took a very short time. I
mean the texture I created based on
actual data. The ocean was too detailed.
So I just spent some time in Photoshop
manual work. It was fun evening it out a
bit. Right. So you can see these places.
So this was done very easily. Okay. So
now it runs on iOS, Mac OS, and Vision.
So when you open this on the headset,
it's a meter and a half wide
in front of you, right? So cool. But
then I added this little dot lower left.
So show countries by, I don't know,
coffee consumption.
The blue thing means it's trying to get
that data.
doesn't always work.
But let's see if we have a cached one.
Population, right? Population. Here you
go.
We've all seen these kinds of graphs.
So, I'm not in any way an inventor of
it. But it this was actually doable from
within Xcode with code. I didn't have to
go outside to get other stuff and feed
it. It found the data. The World Bank is
the source for these things. And I've
told it what kind of caching it should
do. It hasn't finished with that. Uh,
and because these are a bit hard to
read, I added the color gradation at the
very highest, whatever it is should be
orange, so it really sticks out. So, not
only is a is it shape based, and you
guys have talked about color a lot.
Here's an example of useful color
and heights
combined.
You can do something like this. You can
speak Singapore
There's Singapore. In the headset, you
just say Atlas Singapore and it'll show
it to you. Right?
When you go in the headset with this,
you can pull out and have the entire
solar system in the space. The Earth
becomes tiny.
You can pull out further to have the
local cluster of stars in the Milky Way.
&gt;&gt; What are the population levels on Mars?
&gt;&gt; Uh, currently, well, there was one
recently, wasn't it, Matt Damon?
[laughter]
But my po my point of showing you this
now is just to not to show off my toys.
Of course I want to do that. But it's
also to show that for our work graphic
stuff of this quality is now entirely
achievable.
Right. I think that's a bit mad.
All right. Let's build the real thing
again.
Going to make the window a bit bigger.
I have to see you guys. There you are.
So, I'm going to go to uh Kav.
Going to run it
and u
let it do its normal thing. All the
thoughts. Okay. I'm going to do weave.
So, I'm going to do hypertext. Right.
Jamie agree. Yes.
&gt;&gt; Text. Hit enter.
Is that useful right now? No. The others
should fade, shouldn't they?
&gt;&gt; But if you had a dimension called
dimension.hypertext,
you can see the articles that are
classified that way. Have it in their
paragraph.
And
that's why I think the zigzag view can
reduce a lot of the clutter.
Yeah. I mean, one of the things that
gets me excited about AI is that that
the difficulty of these tasks drops so
much that, you know, we don't spend all
of our time coding and spend most of our
time thinking and uh to be able to
because this this kind of thinking is
not easy. [laughter]
&gt;&gt; Yep. And I'll give you an example. While
I was developing that FTL box app, Yeah.
it came up with a way of doing
something, but I found a better way
after I watched it uh code its way
through the wrong direction and I said,
"Okay, well, what what if we created
this register command? Wouldn't that
simplify the interface to these other
commands?" And it it agre it it agreed
and then it implemented it.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, exactly. And I do this in I mean I
don't have your coding expertise Eric
but um I have a coding library in
notebook LM which has you know good
known good uh coding reference works and
so whenever I get stuck on the on the AI
side of things I'll go into notebook LM
and I'll say I'm having this problem and
it'll and it'll literally go and find
the book and say on page 435
this is the error you're getting tell it
to do this and then I go back and then
it unsticks itself. Right.
&gt;&gt; Very nice.
&gt;&gt; That's the
&gt;&gt; right. But even thinking between us, so
like I know that Tom and I share some
interest like Apple computers.
&gt;&gt; If if we had our own Yeah. documents,
you have a whole Ted Nelson library
which I might be interested in. And so
just to find connections between us,
it's this surface them as well.
&gt;&gt; Sure. Absolutely. Yeah. I mean my
original inspiration is actually Vanavar
Bush and the associative trails you know
the fact that I could pick up all those
trails and hand them to you and then the
information's out there. So that's
really not the important the information
nodes are less important. It's not a
question of finding. I mean, it is a
question of finding stuff, but it's a
question of recognizing the significance
of what you found or lack thereof. And
and that that that is, you know, that's
the most important part of thinking. And
again, that's the part of Bush that
we've never been able to create.
So, and of course, it's going to take a
while for my uh processor to process
through what we've been talking about
today. So, um for I don't mean to be
dismissive at all. Uh I've I'm just
trying to wrap my head around exactly
where I go with this because I've been
I'm deep in the weeds and that's part of
my partially my fault. I am deep in the
weeds of trying to figure out this from
a cognitive perspective at the moment.
Um, and uh, trying to translate that
into a application layer is something
that's making my head hurt right now.
[laughter]
Um, and so, uh, you know, I've got two
different levels of problems going on at
the same time. Uh, and, uh, but it is
good to step outside that and say, okay,
what's possible? I mean, I'm working
with another group now that uh is trying
to reform to figure out how to reform
education. It's not, but they're not
education people. I'm I'm pretty much
the the main education person. The rest
of them are startup people. I'm trying
to figure out ways of of reforming the
systems of education, higher education,
and K12. uh and so I've been thinking
through the problems related to that and
then how do I get this reasoning loop
that I've come up with to scale
and uh that you know is actually very
fun too uh uh the idea of actually
making a customized LLM model that could
you know and these the really cool thing
about it is it doesn't need a lot of
horsepower you know you're not you're
basically going through the data that
you are feeding it in a sense You're not
having to go and research the misty
dusty libraries of the world. You're
trying to, you know, think through the,
you know, you you need a certain data
set to train it. But other than that,
it's not, you know, you can run this on
a on a on a local machine, which I think
would again be very attractive to, uh,
school districts and to uh, Jaime's
college, which doesn't want anything to
go outside the walls of the college. uh
as a as a mechanism for for for doing
this, you know, um depending on the you
if you wanted the entire college to
access it, you probably need to run it
on a server. But if you're just doing it
for yourself, you know, and you're the
only one hitting it, I mean, the
limitation there is how many people are
hitting it. Uh and in terms of, you
know, how much the model glows
[laughter]
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Do you remember the game Oregon Trail
for the Apple 2?
&gt;&gt; Yes. and the history of how it just made
its way into classrooms and how it just
uh
&gt;&gt; I don't know all the details of the
history because Yeah. Right. but yeah.
Well, it's like uh Minnesota has a
company that uh a whole consortium of
teachers put it together and uh but the
impact it had a certain generation of
students grew up uh learning how you
interacting with each other as they
tried to play this game. So, what was so
special that captivated their attention
there and let them learn through the
game? And then what's the next one?
Yeah.
I don't know.
&gt;&gt; It's funny that you mentioned Oregon
Trail because it actually came up this
week.
&gt;&gt; Guys, we have to finish and I'm
extremely glad your time today.
&gt;&gt; I love it. [laughter]
So, so what it what it's done here is
that when you type in a keyword because
look this is without right.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; So if I type in Jamie give me a keyword
please. Not hypertext we used it
&gt;&gt; augmentation
augmentation glossery
annotation.
&gt;&gt; So this is what it does. It grays out
the other lines and leaves that. I've
asked it to do a little bit of sentiment
analysis to color the lines, but it's
still trying to figure that out.
&gt;&gt; Point is, maybe we should have more of
these kind of um sessions together to
play with some live stuff and send it
back and forth.
&gt;&gt; Uh give it some ideas. Um it's a bit
different from our normal Mondays and I
think a lot of people would not be
interested in this even though that
would be weird.
What was the other thing you said,
Jenny?
glossery or annotation.
&gt;&gt; There you go. Glossery.
We could even look for making meaning if
you want a phrase.
&gt;&gt; Oh, I don't know if I can.
Oh, it's found it or something.
&gt;&gt; Jamie, do you have a link for that
conference just for more information?
&gt;&gt; Um, I can probably f Yeah, I'll try to
find it.
&gt;&gt; Okay, cool.
This is a conference that's like at the
end of September, correct? Or
&gt;&gt; I think it's midepptember. It's right
between Rashon and Yumipur. Here we go.
Monday the 14th to Friday the 18th.
&gt;&gt; I am going to be traveling then and not
in London unfortunately.
&gt;&gt; Well, again, it might it might be
remote.
&gt;&gt; London is a good place to travel, too.
&gt;&gt; I think it's right [laughter] I think
it's British Library or right near it.
Yeah. Where
&gt;&gt; what are you talking about, Jamie?
&gt;&gt; The I put in a plug in the chat for
narrative hyper media narrative uh
hypermedia.
They're look they asked a couple of days
ago for single page submissions
and since there was talk about Oregon
Trail, it seemed like that kind of
thing. Here we go. Short 500 word
extended abstract to participate in the
workshops through talks and panels.
intend to explore how generative AI is
changing narrative but to broaden
participation. It's open to other new
technological frontiers as well.
&gt;&gt; Provocations and so on.
&gt;&gt; Oh, you did put a link in here.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, just now.
&gt;&gt; Oh, okay. Yeah, this is Miller.
&gt;&gt; This is Charlie's and um Dave, one of
the Daves.
&gt;&gt; Yep. Cool. Well, big Dave. Yeah.
I hope that doesn't get into the
YouTube.
[laughter]
&gt;&gt; Okay, the witch.
Thank you guys. And um I really would
think it would be amazing if you all
install Xcode and then just I mean the
thing is none of us are idiots, but we
can all feel like idiots. At least I
can. So if you come across
&gt;&gt; feel like it constantly
&gt;&gt; well well that's the thing because these
things don't judge us, right?
today because I've been trying to ship
some of these basic apps.
&gt;&gt; I have to say, but where do I click,
&gt;&gt; right? Really basic stuff.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And it just tells you, you know, it's
it's also that human thing of not
wanting to feel stupid. Here, it's okay
to feel stupid. No one's looking. You
know what I mean? And then we slowly get
it.
&gt;&gt; It's
&gt;&gt; Yeah. No, I agree. And it's it right now
my problem is that just have so much I
have so many interesting things to do
that uh it's hard to uh prioritize.
&gt;&gt; So
&gt;&gt; once I have the letters one properly
done I'll try to make normal test
flight. So if you guys want to install
it as a simple thing you can do that too
&gt;&gt; because then we can try just sending a
few things back and forth without a huge
massive thing. But I mean Jamie, I'm
very glad you're here because one of the
opportunities now is a lot of the ideas
in Hypertext. We can just build them,
[laughter]
&gt;&gt; right?
&gt;&gt; I just saw Tom's picture in the chat.
What's Tom's picture?
&gt;&gt; An image,
&gt;&gt; the Oregon Trail reference.
[laughter]
&gt;&gt; Yeah, that's a that's Yeah, that's
classic. But yeah, I mean a lot of the
hypertext stuff we do know. I mean a
transclusion was one of the first things
this thing just implemented. I didn't
even tell it to do transclusion. I said
look at Ted's work. Anything we should
do? Say it to do transclusion. It didn't
do it by the book completely how Ted
would want it. No, it's functionally
there.
&gt;&gt; So yeah,
&gt;&gt; just don't show it to Ted for you.
&gt;&gt; That's a very rule. Just don't show it
to Ted 100%. [laughter]
&gt;&gt; We can improve on his ideas now. You saw
how it
&gt;&gt; No, I don't think that's possible. But
[laughter] I I I think again you've got
to start somewhere and yeah maybe
&gt;&gt; maybe there's some there could be
there's a fatal flaw in it that can't be
corrected the way it started but
&gt;&gt; we don't know yet.
&gt;&gt; Right.
&gt;&gt; You you're going to get nine wrong
answers before you get one right answer.
And the problem is the wrong answers
have been so expensive up to this point
that you really may need need to make
sure you're investing properly. Now, who
cares?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Right.
&gt;&gt; I mean, Mark did make the point that
when I said I spent a,000 pounds over
the last few days, you know, not
everybody can throw that around and I'm
not throwing it around. That is my
research budget, right?
But it means that because that is my
investment right now, we can all use
that, you know, ideas sharing. And
hopefully we'll get to a point soon
that's a bit more stable. So it won't be
that absolute madness. But that's where
we Eric and I have been working on the
views. You know, you make a view and you
share it with someone else and the view
can be made in the same way and then you
basically get the cost down to zero. You
know, you can do it with a very basic um
LLM subscription
and then everybody can do it.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; I look at it like rapid prototyping.
That's what we're able to do now.
&gt;&gt; Exactly.
&gt;&gt; It's rapid prototyping, but you are
making the real thing.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. It's a working code. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; It's kunea form, right? It's y
&gt;&gt; moldable,
&gt;&gt; but it's always the actual thing. Oh my
god. It's just amazing,
&gt;&gt; right? Thank you. Thank you. I look
forward to
&gt;&gt; All right, guys. Um, I will not be here
next Monday, though, because I'm
traveling to visit my mother. So, I'll
be actually sitting on an airplane at on
Monday morning. So, I'll be back the
following Monday, though.
&gt;&gt; Don't they have Starlink on those
planes? [laughter]
&gt;&gt; You don't want You don't want me to do
Zoom that way?
&gt;&gt; No, I have tried it. It doesn't work
very well.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. No, that's fine. and we're going
to go back to more normal um things, but
coding is text. This is definitely part
of the future of text as far as I'm
concerned.
&gt;&gt; I will chew on this.
&gt;&gt; Chew on this
&gt;&gt; as I'm chewing on lunch.
&gt;&gt; Anybody if you have a specific idea for
a view, send it to me. Eric did. Um send
me if you send me an email and say turn
this into a letter, I will do that on
your behalf so we can play with it. It's
it's a fantastic playground. And Jamie,
you may not be aware, all of these are
obviously coming up online, the videos,
also the transcript with analysis and
the song.
&gt;&gt; They're all the transcripts are all
turned into song.
&gt;&gt; Oh, I I think you remember that from a
long time ago.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, that that gotten kind of
interesting lately. So, uh
&gt;&gt; if I if I had realized before, I
wouldn't have I wouldn't have named some
of the people I named or certainly not
the way I did. They tend uh they tend
not to the song shouldn't really name
that. It may name you, but it's being a
bit careful. And now that you've said
that, I will be extra careful to make
sure I don't mention all the um Epstein
related Oh, no. I said the keyword CIA
is going to get us.
&gt;&gt; Love you guys. I'll be careful. And as
always, if there's something in the
transcript you don't like or disagree
with or that was wrong, tell me and I'll
happily delete it in every possible way.
Yeah, you just let me uh know when I can
look when I can look over the
transcript.
&gt;&gt; Tomorrow. I tend to do this in the same
day.
&gt;&gt; Okay. I'll try to remember to look at
it. There's a name or two I want to just
put in a mumble or something for
&gt;&gt; Okay. I can I can look into mumbles.
Thanks again uploading.
&gt;&gt; You can bleep it like it's a cuss word.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Bye. Bye.
&gt;&gt; Bye. Okay. Bye.
