Kind: captions
Language: en
Global collaboration.
&gt;&gt; True. True. Hi Fro.
&gt;&gt; How are you?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Your headset on.
&gt;&gt; Let me see. Uh, you hear me better?
&gt;&gt; Yes. Yes. All good now.
&gt;&gt; Fantastic. Um, just there's this
dialogue that needs to go away from Zoom
before it can say hello. Come on, go
away.
It's trying to do too many things here.
Let's do this. Boom. Here I am. And Eric
is here. That's really nice.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Hi. Yeah. Thank you for inviting
me.
&gt;&gt; No, absolutely. Glad you are here. And
Moheit, I saw you were early. I I
sometimes I'm early, but it's extremely
rare because I have to pick up Edgar, my
son, as most of you know, right before.
So, it's kind of a rush rush to get here
to you guys. So that's why I'm usually
on time or a bit later.
&gt;&gt; So yeah, very good. Hello, Peter. Peter,
&gt;&gt; so what's the temperature in New York
then, Peter?
&gt;&gt; Well, I'm in I'm in North Carolina, a
little further south. It's actually
cooled down here. We had thunderstorms
last night, so a little bit of
&gt;&gt; it's only in the
&gt;&gt; upper 80s Fahrenheit.
&gt;&gt; That sounds good. I traded I traded 112
degrees the other day for 70° with
torrential downpours today. [laughter]
&gt;&gt; It's same in Mumbai. You know torrenial
downpours streets are flooded
&gt;&gt; really
&gt;&gt; all across you know I I think you know
at least uh 80 100 kilometer radius.
&gt;&gt; Wow.
&gt;&gt; I'm in Delaware and we just got a flash
flood warning so we're getting weather
too.
Uh that's
&gt;&gt; so um Peter Rosilo in New York. It's
only 24 degrees today, but as you said,
that's not the main issue. Uh today we
are actually warmer in London. We have
31.
&gt;&gt; Oh,
&gt;&gt; in real degrees. I don't know what that
is in your Fahrenheit thing.
&gt;&gt; Most of you here are American, so I
guess I I should make uh allowances.
&gt;&gt; Don't apologize for being logical.
&gt;&gt; [clears throat]
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well said, Peter. And Tom is here.
So, I have to ask you, did anyone of you
see any of the football games?
&gt;&gt; Hi, Tom. Have any of you seen any of the
football games?
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; And where did you think?
&gt;&gt; What are you waiting for? England or
Norway?
&gt;&gt; Yes. [laughter]
&gt;&gt; This is recorded. I'm not going to give
you more than that.
&gt;&gt; I only follow Graham Sumo.
There is um I I'll just hang on. I'll
I'll just
Yeah, it's kind of interesting actually
uh because some of it actually goes into
to our world. I'm just going to upload a
a brief picture here real quick from
computer.
One moment.
Uh where is it?
Yeah, that was a bad game last night.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, the England match.
&gt;&gt; The England match.
&gt;&gt; It was too late for us, but um
&gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. That's true.
&gt;&gt; We saw the Norway one. But but what's
really interesting is it it used to be
at least the England team. By the way,
Eric, you haven't suddenly entered into
the wrong crowd. Okay, this is not our
normal discourse, just to be clear.
&gt;&gt; Go ahead. [laughter]
Um, you know, like we I've seen some of
the top top games in history because it
kind of had to and it was very often
these egos running around on the pitch,
but the Norway game was much more
organized and the England game
considering what they were up against.
The manager, the way he put it together,
really impressive. It really comes down
to the things we talk about,
collaboration, figuring out what's going
on spatially, all of that was there just
in a bold manner.
So, yes, my son did go to school today
in the Norwegian uh football uniform. Uh
&gt;&gt; oh.
But
&gt;&gt; that's dangerous.
&gt;&gt; Well, yeah,
&gt;&gt; this for this week at least.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, maybe.
&gt;&gt; Holland plays for uh Man City, right?
&gt;&gt; Hold on. Hold on. He's changed his name.
He used to have a have it differently.
&gt;&gt; Uh I have no idea.
But he plays for
&gt;&gt; he plays for a um
&gt;&gt; he does play for a British team so that
does become an interesting issue.
&gt;&gt; Um so um today Moit did a presentation a
while ago which was great. Uh he has
sent me a paper that has taken me
significant amount of time to suddenly
look at and it's very very interesting.
So we're going to schedule him doing a
implementation presentation soon where
it's not why but what. So I look forward
to that. I did plan to have it as the
last slide in the present in in my brief
let's have a discussion presentation
today but uh it's so very very different
from the topic of today that uh I don't
think it's useful. So I'm just going to
show you guys a few slides. Um and Eric
uh being the newbie here the way we do
this um first of all we try to be a very
friendly bunch I believe we are if
someone has to leave early or come in
late it's never a problem some people
come here for many sessions some come
here for a few we all have lives so
there's no no formality as oh I'm sorry
I have to leave or whatever it's just
the way it is similarly we tend to start
with um some sort of a presentation
and then we make not a lot of effort and
staying on topic.
&gt;&gt; So, it it it's just a kickoff. So,
right,
&gt;&gt; I'm here to learn.
&gt;&gt; You're here to learn. Okay, cool. Uh I'm
not sure if there's going to be any
learning happening, but I hope we'll
have a good enough time. Yeah, you can
see, right?
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; So, I've had as I'm sure you have had
real problem with two things. Why would
anyone want to work in a headset?
and what are the things to work with in
the headset? So today at the beginning
at least it's really about the elements
in space
what what what are they what what should
they be right so uh also this is for
thinking not necessarily for academics
we often tend to go towards academics
but this is not we we don't have to
worry about citation bib and all of that
in this context right let's try to
rethink thinking
which is a bit of a stretch right So,
&gt;&gt; I had a chat with my friend Shannon, uh,
Eric, that's who I sometimes I call.
Yeah, good. You got that immediately.
Um, and it went through a few things.
I'm going to go by them quite quickly
because they're just really brief
inspirations for us,
but it talked about how um,
&gt;&gt; human memory. Oh, oh, by the way, the
the way this conversation was had was
Claude Five Fable is back, so I'm sure
you all know. So I asked Claude first if
you look at Claude five fable if you
only look at neuroscience
and psychology what are the things we
should have in our space it immediately
downgraded to f from fable to 4.8
because of guard rails and all of that's
fine. So I then said okay can you please
summarize this and rephrase it as a
question so we can try it with Abel and
it failed again but what happened was
because it was a new instance of Claude
it started arguing with itself.
I I know you all have a lot of
experience with AIS, but I really found
it was quite fruitful because I went
through this four times where it said,
"Oh, this really makes sense. This is
great." Then the next time it would say,
"No, that's really stretching the
point." So, so that's how these few
slides came about, right?
Started talking about how human memory
is reconstructive. We don't remember a
thing as a solid factual object.
talked about structures, right? And then
a really nice thing and I wish Mark
Anderson could be here today. The
primitive as in primitive like shapes
primitive act of mind isn't asserting,
it's distinguishing. That makes sense,
right?
This is different from this.
Not necessarily this thing is kind of
useful.
&gt;&gt; Or this is the same as this or similar.
&gt;&gt; Exactly. Yes. Yes. Exactly. So th this
became interesting cuz I said um what
about the notion of a node if you look
at the mmology cuz a node originally
meant not of course. So then the string
the connector is the vital thing. The
not is just a thing on it. This is the
thing that Claude argued against itself
a few times.
But what comes out of this is I'm I'm
sure we would agree that if you have a
knowledge graph any node or connection
should be interchangeable. you should be
able to display it like the node is a
connection or the connection is a node.
&gt;&gt; And in the system that I'm working on
where you can define concepts
um
because here on these ones it it keeps
talking about threads and connections
rather than objects, right?
Uh this one is kind of obvious. you
can't focus on many things but
um
&gt;&gt; yeah so build the knot and the thread
you know build building them together
the these are really the key points so
all I decided to do as a practical thing
that came out of this is in the I'll
show you it's so simple
so let's open uh
uh mah I've been reading your paper
again by putting it in author So let's
say I had defined the word augment,
right? So in here I had define and I had
lots of words. In fact, let's find
something that is defined. No, nothing's
defined. Okay,
&gt;&gt; I wrote this in author.
&gt;&gt; Oh, you did.
&gt;&gt; Yeah,
&gt;&gt; okay. So this is really fascinating in
terms of how Claude can actually
contribute towards a function. Right. So
it said that the system and I'm sorry it
wasn't in the slides. The system should
ideally not let you just add a thing.
You should have to add it with
connections.
So that makes sense. So all I'm thinking
about is adding when you go through the
definition you've written. Oh sorry u
Eric just briefly um this is just a like
a glossery defined concept in in my
software author which is you know
obviously how I think right. So why not
when you [clears throat] select text in
there should you not be able to define
that directly from here
so that is a fun right so that's a
function in a piece of software but the
idea is that
uh let's just open something this one I
think has a few defined uh okay so if
you look at this this is a real document
that I have been working on
here's a definition of anglebar
ignore whether it's correct or useful or
whatever but for the sake of uh argument
so to speak right the bold text are
links to other defined terms so if I
click on pharmicon it'll show me this
click on Socrates it'll go to that
so if you then while you are defining
your things to see if you understand
them can define the terms you're
It may be useful.
Did I over talk that or did that make
sense?
&gt;&gt; Yeah, that does. You know, I am reminded
of the uh the the browser company of New
York, you know, in the browser the arc
when they launched on phone uh they had
this thing uh which was uh I'm just
opening uh if I still have that. I don't
have that but you know they had this
thing browse for me. So you can
highlight it and there's this thing you
know that would open up browse for me.
So what browse for me used to do was it
used to dynamically generate a web page
but that was not specifically for you.
You know if you uh did that uh uh with
something on your phone, it will show
you exactly uh the same web page as it
would to me. But you know for uh both of
us you know that browse for me what it
could do should be actually a sort of
you know uh a little individualistic
based on the kind of things that you
have in your resource library you know
the kind of things that you want uh that
you have previously interacted with that
could be uh relevant.
So you know in here uh when uh I was
just reminded of this uh when you were
so the definition of a term of a
relationship uh that uh you know keep
even that uh even when we are talking
about book or an article or a scientific
paper the kind of bibliographies that
are there they are set but they could be
a lot more relevant based on the readers
uh experience.
Uh yeah, that that makes sense. And um
ju just to kind of um frame this a
little bit
when we go through these things, it's
really important I think to be very
abstract in our thinking and let's just
have fun. So we can imagine we make a
piece of knowledge here,
right? And then oh it's we it means this
stuff
but then I have to define one of these
stuffs. So when I show you a MAC
interface
you know that that's a very cluji way to
try to make this real.
&gt;&gt; So hopefully we we can think of um and
Mo what I think you're talking about is
partly context. So yeah you're defining
these things but there's all this other
relevant stuff. So but if we think about
it as floating clouds or spheres
uh which I think we should it can become
difficult to
um grab them. And one thing that I think
Claude said quite well is that these
things do need a shape so the human can
touch them and interact with them and
move them
&gt;&gt; contextual defined further defined and
so on.
So, I've been thinking about Douglas
Engelbart's demo showing his route going
home, the grocery store, and all the
things you have to get. So, if you think
about that was a very simple map which
had links into each node and you could
expand and collapse and I think we need
that metaphor in AR somehow.
So um a document I shared with some of
you it's um it has a story of a
distributed team working in AR and um it
what I found interesting is that Claude
picked that out that node graph as a
first class element.
So something to think about.
I'm so glad you said that because
to me that bit of Doug's demo is
probably the coolest and it's probably
the furthest from what we have now. I
mean we used to have image maps, right?
An average person could do something
like that and then they disappeared.
And the problem we have developing for
something like Vision OS, if you do it
native rather than Web XR or something,
is that you can't connect to things
currently that aren't in the document.
So Eric, what you're talking about is
absolutely the kind of thing we need
where you have whether it's a root home
or whatever the shape is to be able to
get more stuff is is just absolutely
super important. But can you
tell us some more about the distributed
AR team that you were talking about?
Okay. So, um, yeah, at the beginning of
my chat, I was, uh, just ideulating
about what it would take to build NLS
today. And Claude had some ideas, but
then I had it write a story. And um the
prompt is write a story about a
distributed team using this system in an
augmented reality environment where they
can meet virtually at times convenient
for them, co-work with other team
members who are present, leave notes on
shared boards in the environment, and
optimize team productivity towards a
project goal. So, I wrote a nice story.
Um, and um, yeah, it was pretty much
what I would expect, but then I added
some wrinkles to it uh, to illustrate
the security concerns. And I was
thinking local first if we had uh,
decentralized data in this system and it
outlines some security issues with
rekeying. So um I'm going to share the
link to the uh the document in chat and
um yeah there's also an issue in that
GitHub where you could uh comment on it
and I have some links in that issue to
other resources if you want to explore
this topic further.
So this is really fun because
I started the day talking about what
should things in space be and Claude
said forget the things it's the
connection and then Mojit makes me
through being in my email inbox for a
couple weeks read about context as a
system right and then Tom H is building
a knowledge navigator and Eric you are
looking into ideas around rebuilding NLS
this to me is very very exciting
you know, if we can manage to find ways
for this stuff to work together. I mean,
there's been so many types of um formats
and interchanges. There's been J well,
there is, not only has been JSON and all
these things, but maybe for fun, we
should look at things like MCPs.
We aren't building AI systems and I have
no idea what an MCP is in reality, but
it seems to be very flexible since it's
one AI saying here's some stuff to
another AI. So, um I'm I'm looking at
what you shared, Eric, but I'm wondering
what you guys think about
the way these things can flow together.
&gt;&gt; Especially the villain. The MCP was the
villain in Tron.
&gt;&gt; [laughter]
&gt;&gt; That was a different MCP. Is that what
it's called? MCP. I don't even know
that.
&gt;&gt; Master control protocol. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Right. [laughter]
&gt;&gt; Master control program. That's the Tron
bad guy.
&gt;&gt; Yep.
&gt;&gt; Or male chauvinist pig. That also works.
&gt;&gt; For anyone listening, it's model context
protocol. That's what it means.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; We run out of initials after a while.
It's just it's it's funny. Um
yeah, I've kind of had a uh
shall I say a um existential crisis over
the last few weeks as I have been trying
to drag my students kicking and
streaming up um up the thinking line
layers
and thinking that [sighs and gasps]
giving them the right tools in AI to do
that will help them make that transition
because that's a that's an eternal
struggle as a teacher.
Um, and that's why I put the Bloom's
taxonomy on there because that is
something I don't know how many of you
guys know what Bloom's taxonomy is, but
it's very, you know, it's it's it's kind
of one of those foundational things in
the educational
world to people who actually pay any
attention to what actual teaching is as
and that that's a fairly small
percentage of people in the educational
world, but that's another story
entirely. Um but uh you know it
basically goes from the lowest or the
foundational level which is basically
read and regurgitate all the way up to
create at the very highest level where
you're synthesizing things and building
building your own things out of them.
And the AI can reasonably mimic
everything up to the analyze level. Uh
and um the the and it can do create too.
It's just bad at creating. I mean, we,
you know, we have very low standards for
creation sometimes, but you know, if you
really think about it, the people who
are real artists should not be
threatened by AI. Um, but the thing that
I wanted to get to here is that, um,
this proved to be a lot harder than I
expected. Um, people are trained to work
at the low levels. People are trained to
work in an industrial system where they
are cogs in the machine. And that
training is hard to break.
And a lot of the stuff we're talking
about here in terms of being able and
and I know our audience, well, at least
it was for the the Sloan project was um
uh was the was academics, right?
Scholarly work and things like that.
Theoretically, they are already working
at that higher level. I wouldn't put
that as a guarantee though. Um but the
idea that we can suddenly build it and
they will come
uh has been a bit of a shocker for me.
Uh and I'm question it in the context of
the knowledge navigator. But I also
think depending on what who our audience
ultimately is. If we look at this as a
worldchanging device or system like Doug
looked at the NLS which is also again a
way of pushing yourself up that higher
up. That's what he's talking about when
he's talking about augmenting human
intellect. He's talking about pushing us
to the creativity level. Uh the version
of Blooms that existed, there was a
version of Blooms back in the 1950s, but
it it's been superseded by this more
complex model which has six levels. He
may or may not have been familiar with
it. I don't know. Um but uh that's
clearly what he's talking about when
he's talking about augmenting human
intellect. He's talking about and to and
the thing I said a few weeks ago is that
it's only augmentation if you grow from
the process as well. If you're basically
the same place you are at the end of the
process than you were at the beginning
of the process, i.e. I asked a bunch of
questions about history. It gave me a
bunch of answers. I've forgotten those
answers. I'm back to where I was. Um
then you're not augmented at all. But if
you are thinking at it a different way,
if you're thinking about problems in a
different way, and I think that's a
critical thing when we're talking about
here, when we're talking about our
system or your system, Froda, is is that
it's about shifting perspectives and
making those connections in a different
way. Um because otherwise, why do it?
Because it's already all in books,
right? So, uh I personally agree with
you that books are a good way to hide
information. Uh, and I love books, but
they are not terribly efficient in some
ways in terms of seeing the
constellation of information because
they're a linear product. Um, and so,
uh, yeah, and oh, by the way, you know,
I have been telling you, uh, Frodo, that
the the key is the connections. And so,
I I I see Claude finally confirmed me.
[laughter]
&gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. Yeah. No, absolutely. It's a
it's an important um it's an important
thing. You know, knowledge is is
connections. But it was really
interesting to have uh Claude fight me
and say, "Why are you talking about
stuff? Shouldn't talk about the stuff.
Talk about the connectors."
&gt;&gt; Yep. And that's what Doug was and um
certainly that's what Ted Nelson's
talking about when he's talking about
transclusion. Uh it's it's it's what
Doug essentially is talking about uh in
in augmenting human intellect in terms
of you know that's all about making
connections. It's what Bush of course
the associative trails Vanavar Bush
that's connections. I mean this is a
repeating theme and something that we
that anybody who looks at this stuff
from you know Angel and Nelson on Allen
K you pick your pick your poison all
recognize that that's the critical
element that's always been missing from
our supposed implementation of Bush's
ideas from as as we may think is that
that we lose those that we've never
built a good connection machine. We
think we have, but the connections have
still all been manual. If you are using
the web and you're creating
um links and things like that, that is
your that is your um uh uh making the
connection based on what your biases and
your other, you know, this is important.
There should be a link to this so that
person can go read read that article.
That's your call. And I'm not saying to
take that away, but uh it's it's still
working in through the blinders of the
author in a sense. And so how do we get
beyond the blinders of the author? Um
and that's
and then how do you build something that
people are able to consume? And that's
that's my problem right now is I'm like,
okay, yeah, I can't just put this plate
in front of people and expect them to
understand how to eat it. Uh, and uh, I
had a bit of movement, but it really is
I'm pulling people by the scruff of
their neck across this this these lines
uh, where I thought that the AI would be
more effective at automating those kinds
of questioning because that's what I've
been talking about. And it happens with
me. I'll often start out with a
low-level question and by the end of the
conversation, I'm at the create level
going, "Oh, well, this piece of
information connects to this piece of
now. Okay, now I get it. Now I can put
these together and make something
different.
And that to me is incredibly exciting.
That's what I consider learning. Um, but
getting my students to do that is not
easy. And this is a big problem because
it's also a problem for the workforce
because we're going to hand AI to all
these people and expect them to suddenly
become massively more productive. Well,
productive to me means working at a
higher level, not work. And it's not
about working faster, it's about working
smarter. and um industrialization and
the way we measure things in terms of
productivity and things like that. It's
all about going faster. Uh and and
that's that's a that's a massive problem
too because
um that's where you make first of all
from the perspective of using AI that's
where hallucinations really bite you in
the butt because if you're in a hurry
and you're not checking things and
you're not you know you're not thinking
about what you're doing you're expecting
the AI to do it for you and it makes a
mistake then you own that mistake and
that's where we get the stories of the
lawyers submitting briefs with cases
that don't that that are fictional and
you know I've I've done it too. I
screwed up the last assignment in my
class in terms of the instructions
because I was in a hurry at that point.
I was just putting stuff together uh and
the AI did something that I looked at
after the fact and went, "Oh, yeah, this
is incredibly confusing." Fortunately,
it wasn't a big deal at the end of the
day because most of my students didn't
make it to that assignment, but those
that did. So, but yeah, it's a thinking
problem and so can we use this these
technologies to elevate our thinking? So
Tom, you in one of your articles, you
made the point that I think the title
even was never ask the AI just one
question,
&gt;&gt; right?
&gt;&gt; There has to be a follow-up. So, thanks.
Hey, Peter. And yes, go.
Yeah, it's gotten so bad with the AI
usage in law that they have formally
changed the continuing legal education
requirements for the bar in New York
State to require us to take actual
courses to tell us that we shouldn't
just trust the citations that the AI
comes up with to legal cases that may
not actually exist.
It's that bad because people are just
offloading too much of their cognitive
activity to the LLM models and they're
way way way too trusting. So now we
literally have to sit through hours of
being lectured that it's not a good idea
to hand the judge papers that you didn't
actually create yourself or bother to
read.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean I I think a lot of times we
overestimate how much intellectual
activity is actually going on. But
that's another conversation. But but
this but that goes for humans too. I
mean I had a conversation with my
closest friends today who is in a
completely different discipline and um
you know I was thanking her for the
dialogue because you guys focus on this
similarly to me and that's really good.
We may tunnel vision us a little bit.
She comes in and asked completely
different things and because I respect
her intellects if she sounds stupid I'm
the one being stupid. So it's a really
good opportunity to think further. But
this kind of way of how to learn to deal
with other minds, one of the exciting
things about now is we have to learn how
to deal with AI.
&gt;&gt; You know, we this is really part of what
literacy means now. And you know, like I
the little anecdote in the beginning, I
made the AI argue against itself. I
didn't put it into another AI.
&gt;&gt; That's kind of fun, but it's this. So
Tom, the stuff you're trying to teach
the kids cuz you're on the firing line
here, you know, it's the same stuff. And
I don't know, it's a pioneer time we're
living through when it comes to this.
&gt;&gt; Oh, Eric, please speak your question.
That's a great question.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Okay. So, I'm wondering if you had
different types of learning environments
um embodied learning using the body uh
physically or can we have an AR learning
environment and situations which can
actually put the students in a situation
where they need to cooperate or um
analyze something critically
and u maybe they can use some AI I but
maybe AI can prompt them in a way to um
think more critically if it's built
correctly.
&gt;&gt; That is the fundamental question if it's
built correctly. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; This is not a technological problem.
This is a human problem.
&gt;&gt; Exactly.
&gt;&gt; I mean right now I I don't know if he
can hear me. Um my son who is an
incredible boy is not a very loud boy.
um he had an argument with a friend and
there were some issues on how he dealt
with it that I don't agree with. So you
know that's a human teaching human thing
and the worst person to teach is of
course the parent at the moment. you
know later on turns out he will have
picked up things when it comes to
distributed teaching you know with with
students of course it's a different
dynamic but despite talking about
abstractions in the beginning of the
call today
information is very very literal so
maybe it's more useful for us if we talk
about specific things I mean right now
considering what we're sitting through
climate change is one of those issues
you know how do to teach that.
I mean, that may be basically a movie,
maybe better than any facts or
interactive system, right? It's it
really comes down to what we're trying
to
transfer to someone, doesn't it?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean, uh, if you've never read,
uh, Diana Laurelard's, um, work on
education, she used to be, uh, vice
chancellor of the open university. Uh,
and, uh, she's done a lot of really good
thinking about, uh, teaching and
learning in a technology environment and
but the fundamentals of what happens in
a learning environment. And uh she has
this thing called the conversational
framework
uh which uh is showing all of the
different conversations that happen
between the the teacher and the students
and among the students and within the
student and uh it's a really good guide.
The thing that I have really noticed in
terms of my own students is I can get
incremental change if I'm in a
synchronous situation with them. I'm
either in a Zoom kind of class or in a
physical classroom with them. But the
ones that I that really are this is
where the blood bath occurred this
summer was in my completely asynchronous
classes. Uh because they never get that
conversation with me because I can't I
can't meet with them live. I can't force
them to meet with me live. I I can hold
office hours but if they show up I mean
I did that a couple times and like two
students showed up. Uh, and um, but it
was it was just it was awful because
they couldn't I was hoping the AI would
replace that and they they would have
those conversations with the AI and I
put all sorts of materials together and
I wrote you know and created comics
uh to illustrate because they won't read
lots of instructions. I mean this is the
fundamental problem too. You can, it's
the same thing with game design. You
know, you can either make it realistic
or easy. And the trick with a game
designer is to balance those two uh
against each other because if it's too
realistic, it's unplayable.
Uh there's a famous game uh I think it
was it the North African campaign or
something like that that was partially
made as a joke but it's supposedly so
complex that no one's ever actually
completed it. [laughter]
So, but you know that's the problem as a
teacher too. And in terms of any sort of
information exchange, you make it simple
and you lose you you it's hard to make
things simple, but it's you lose that
level of of specificity.
But if you make it too complex, they're
going to ignore it because they can't
understand it anyway. Now, of course, AI
can help on both of those counts. I
mean, I've used AI extensively to write
my instructions to be more
understandable. I have used uh and I
tell my students also if you don't
understand what I'm saying or you don't
understand what these instructions are
saying drop it into your local chatbot
and say explain this to me so I can
understand it and don't let it off the
hook until you do.
They don't do that as far as I can tell
but that's you know but the point is
that these are things that to me seem bl
glaringly obvious solutions to problems
and roads that they just do not take and
I you know again that's been my real
frustration. I mean, I was I was so
hoping that AI would would would put
that in front of them. But again, I
think it's partially training. I think
they've just been so trained by the
system. The the fall back when they
start to panic is, "Well, what do you
want me to do?" And I'm like, "Well, I
want you to think, and I don't want you
to imitate me." But of course, imitating
is what they've learned to do. You know,
the teacher says, "Well, do what I do."
And and um that's not thinking for
yourself. And that's this is the
problem. Um but I this again this goes
well beyond my students though I've been
a manager I've managed 50 60 people
exactly the same problem you can give a
lot of detailed instructions and really
handcuff people or you can take your
chances on the people thinking and that
latter one they don't all you would
think in my situation I always like that
if my boss said okay just handle it
here's here's where we need to get to
let's just handle it But most of my
employees found that very uncomfortable
because I was pushing the risks onto
them and thinking is risky. Uh and
that's that's kind of what I'm
struggling against a bit now. Um I don't
know if again I don't think there's a
technological solution to it. I think
there are things that can augment our
ability to overcome it. I do think I
still think AI can do that but it's
going to be a lot harder than I was
thinking say a couple of months ago. So
one of the things you said there uh
about instructions Tom
when I was teaching one of the things I
did with the first years I asked them to
go and take three black and white
photographs of something of London. It
needed to be printed on A4 paper black
and white square in the middle.
And um the whole point was exactly that
if someone I asked for three pictures if
someone gave me four I would fail them.
right to to really get it early in, read
the damn instructions,
right? Of course, it was it was first
year, so it was a bit of a shock class
where they were like, "Oh, what's going
on?" You know, once the emotion was
there, who cares? It's not important.
But just getting people to read the
instructions is hard. But if but if we
go a little past education and look at
our own
um that actually, Eric,
here's the thing. Do you mind
introducing yourself?
&gt;&gt; Yeah, sure. Hello.
&gt;&gt; A bit of context. Thank you.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Um, so I'm a retired software
engineer. Um, started in the corporate
world doing cobalt year 2000 and
eventually uh Java and C. And these days
um I'm trying to learn closure on the
recommendation of Sam Han who's a mentor
to me and uh he trying to get my h head
around the immutability and how it could
solve concurrency problems. But um I've
been interested in the ideas of Ted
Nelson and Doug Engelbart
and um really thinking ahead
because it really is a shame when you
see how they're have great ideas that
just haven't gone that far. And so I'm
excited about possibilities for AR. Um,
I've done little experiments like using
A-Frame just to get a sense of a 3D
space, but um, I see possibilities. I'm
also interested in decentralized data.
Um, I've been just exploring those
technologies.
Um, but one key thing about that, it's
very difficult to find a business model
for decentralized data. Um,
yeah. So there's like a different
culture where you have to um you like a
hacker culture that a small groups may
adopt it but yeah practically for we're
talking about there's that mainstream
like Apple community uh with a vision
pro you you I'm glad you have an
offering going in their app store to get
um yeah some publicity around the
possibility of text and AR. Um, so there
there's a lot of possibilities. Uh, so
I'm just trying to figure out where I
can fit in, how I can help right now.
&gt;&gt; Thank you, Eric.
I I'm looking a little bit also at our
our chat and I have to ask the question
uh considering the problems in the world
right now where we're talking about war,
climate change, uh
equality differences in many many realms
and so on. What are the things that we
for the sake of this discussion, the six
of us really think
should be taught to the next generation?
Cuz if we're talking about
straightforward maths, engineering,
history, to an extent,
that's old. But I I do think all of us
agree that metacognition is important.
People really need to learn to think
better as do we. I'm sure I'm sure we
can also be improved. But as an example,
what what are the things we would really
prioritize being taught?
Cuz Peter is talking about
um yeah, Peter Rosila, why don't you
elaborate because it may come into this
discussion, you know, what what are
these professors really trying to teach,
right?
Well,
&gt;&gt; what do we want to teach
&gt;&gt; in law school? They were trying to teach
their worldview. And it it wasn't a
party politics thing. It was just a how
the world works and how things function.
For instance, I locked horns with my
adviser in law school many times over
software patents. And I told them, I'm a
programmer. I know dozens of
programmers. There's not one of them
that's motivated by the idea of running
out and grabbing software patents and
litigating over them. I it's a
non-issue. But the official sanctioned
law school view was that the only reason
the software industry exists is because
of our rigorous IP laws and they have to
constantly be strengthened and built up
higher and thicker. And because I was
questioning that worldview and my push
back made sense, you know, it suffered
when it came time to be writing letters
of recommendation for potential
positions after law school. So I paid a
price for my honesty and a lot of other
people had similar situations. We had
one student in my freshman year who was
doing push back on questions related to
Middle Eastern politics. You know, it
shouldn't have had anything to do with
class, but because
he expressed that viewpoint, the
professor came down on him like a ton of
bricks and that was the end of his
participating in class. as soon as he
correlated the fact that true actual
open discussion
results in severe personal consequences
that extend into the grading world.
Unfortunately, uh he learned the lesson.
So what were they teaching? They were
teaching the students to as perfectly
current their views on literally
everything. You not even politics per
se. Just if the professor views that
certain abstract values are more
important than other ones, then you damn
well better pirate that value hierarchy
when you're writing your exam answers or
you're going to suffer. So the only
question that the students ask is what
do you want me to think? I I know you
won't really care what I actually think.
What do I need to tell you that I think
so you will think that you've succeeded
in teaching me to think about everything
the way you think about everything so
that you will reward me for thinking
about everything. So please let me
become a clone of you dear professor.
How can I better let myself become a
clone of you? I am putty in your hands.
And that's the mentality that is
implicated into the students because
they see what happens when somebody gets
out of line.
&gt;&gt; So this is really interesting because I
I don't know the right word for it but I
would say I neither agree or disagree. I
see it differently and we should have a
word for that and that is um
if you pardon me Peter was elko um let's
say a lawyer view and I have several
friends who are lawyers not just you
Peter uh maybe that your stance in the
world is that it's the patent thing you
know if your patent if the only tool you
have is a hammer everything is a nail
right it's not just that it is also our
everyday background processes
So my father was a businessman. For him,
how's he going to make money? You know,
he he was a good man, but the primary
driver for him was like we talked about
football, making money once you have
enough to live in business is is goals.
You know, you're doing something. In the
military, you have a very different
worldview. How do you blow up that
bunker?
I I think we need to figure out a way
and I'm so glad this came up to harness
this because we are a bunch of whether
we're politically leftist or right or
whatever is a bit irrelevant but all of
us here are Doug Engelbart want to do
better with the world
take care of each other we expect other
people to not want to destroy our
database so to speak and as most of you
know Ted Nelson thought that Doug was
extremely unrealistic in this. So, how
can we take into
account
these professors who have this
worldview? They may very well be
representing their profession. I mean, I
I've noticed it within my profession,
too. You know, I I saw your comment
there, Tom. I have a PhD
but I got my PhD as an adult and I got
it for many reasons that wasn't just the
straight through studying. The reason
that I'm building my software is partly
so that people like my dear friend Mark
who many of you know and who I love and
adore greatly shouldn't just be people
like him who can do well in academia.
He doesn't love the kind of things he
has to do like latte and stuff but he
has the brain that enables him to do it.
So, you know, all these professors, we
need to
I don't know. [clears throat] It's an
interesting discussion. I'm glad it came
up.
&gt;&gt; Tom, you wrote a book. I'm not
surprised. You write a lot.
&gt;&gt; This is that's this is technically my
first book, but learn at your own risk.
&gt;&gt; Um, which is I wrote this during the
pandemic. My discovering digital
humanity was a work that took years to
write. I wrote this in four months. Uh
and um was kind of meant to be a sequel,
but it took too long to fix the other
book, so it became the first book came
out second. U but it's based on the same
kind of thinking. Um but yeah, I mean
the you know, we should never forget
that education is an industrial system.
It's built on grades. Um, law school is
kind of the pinnacle of that. Um, and I
wisely decided not to for, you know, get
into law school. Uh, I was foolish
though in thinking that when I went to
grad school that this was an invitation
for me to think for myself and develop a
mechanisms for thinking myself. Uh, and
I learned that that was not the case
with this particular professor who
failed me on my political theory comp
because I would not cowtow to her view
of these books which I thought was
naive. [laughter]
I think she was u I would I I'm
generally speaking a non-interventionist
when it comes to international the
course was ethics and international
relations and I'm generally a
non-interventionist when it comes to
inter international relations because
although I may want to help I've seen
time and time again if it's not your
country you're probably going to mess it
up worse than when you when you went
into it. There are very few exceptions
to that. You people sort of have to
solve their own problems at a certain
level. Um and um especially if that
country is distant in in space and
culture uh that makes it even worse. So
interventions in the Middle East with
the United States or at the time it was
was talking about Yugoslavia. Uh and uh
although that turned out better than I
expected uh in the end but at the same
time
yeah I you know she was very much hey if
these circumstances occur then you can
you can you're justified in going in and
I'm like that's not what [clears throat]
these authors say. They put up a list of
criteria that's awfully hard to meet and
if you think about this objectively,
you're you're never going to meet their
standards to do this. And she didn't
agree with me and we went back and forth
and she failed me on my comp twice and
yeah, prime directive. Exactly.
[laughter]
That's exactly right. So, but yeah, I
mean the point is that um the system is
designed to create conformity and I
would argue that law school is is was
very is very much designed to create
conformity. Uh, and in a world of AI, in
a world of AR, we're trying to break
down walls, and this is a very
non-conformist notion. And I think those
parts of Englebart that never got
accepted were the most dangerous in
terms of that conformity argument. I
mean, they they took his tools to make
things faster and easier, but they
didn't necessarily make them better.
&gt;&gt; And so, yeah,
&gt;&gt; I just bought your book, Tom. Thank you.
&gt;&gt; Oh, okay. And um for those of you who
are not in the future of text series of
books, please get in there and if you
published a book, tell me because then
I'll buy it. I'll probably read it, but
definitely put it on my bookshelf. It's
about a meter long now of books. So
people have been in it. So thank you,
Tom.
Um
&gt;&gt; that's good.
&gt;&gt; Okay, Eric asked a nice question. So I'm
just going to share something with you
really briefly.
Uh you can still see, right?
&gt;&gt; Mhm. So, this is um a little guide to
using author for vision that I just put
together this weekend. Forget about the
words. I'm just going to show you a few
images because uh the question Eric
asked was about reading in AR, right?
So, a basic thing we've done is you can
read like this. It's a normal scrollable
document that you can resize
and you have a context menu that's kind
of cool and a toolbar. But
we did a thing where the stuff in space,
the nodes,
there's a category called sections which
can be automatically created based on a
document's heading and the text below
it.
So that means that you can instantly
have all the sections of your book like
this or by depth or anything you want.
It is extremely rudimentary and
unsophisticated,
but it does immediately blow up what a
book or a document is, you know, when
you when you can walk around and look at
it. Uh, of course, feel free whatever to
look at all the different things like
this. But because of that question, I
just wanted to show that that's all.
&gt;&gt; So, okay.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. No, go on. I'm sorry. that um so
when I see those pictures that's a case
of the system automatically dividing up
the book and I guess it's assuming that
it's an unstructured document see
Angelbart had structuring and that's why
you were able to collapse sections see
the first line of every paragraph and
things like that so the thing is yeah
can we get back to a structuring
methodology or automatically structuring
&gt;&gt; it's semi high structured.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Uh and the structures come from number
one are the headings themselves
&gt;&gt; and number two we have the notion of
marking sentences not just highlighting
them but marking them. Uh and the reason
for that by default they turn orange.
There's two reasons. Number one as you
work through your own document and you
get to paragraph it you can pull out
this the sentence that really or words
that really that's what it's about. And
if you don't have one per paragraph,
then you probably should rewrite your
paragraph. But when you then go into an
outline or overview, all of these show
up.
So instead of the first sentence of
every paragraph, it becomes the first
semantically valid unit of every
paragraph that comes up. So that's why
I'm saying semistructured.
the what you saw here you're absolutely
right to in a nice way attack as being
compared to NLS augment kind of a cluge
I completely agree that we need to go
further in the direction of the system
knowing what bits are so we can more
intelligently change the viewspec and so
on so fully agree with you there Eric
&gt;&gt; okay thanks
&gt;&gt; and the reason I I showed that was
partly because of that nice question but
also as a
counterpoint to our discussion today
where we're trying to ignore both paper
and text and look at thinking.
I wonder what thoughts there are on
that.
You know, if we try to ignore teaching
and try to ignore books. So, one second.
Say hi. Yes. There you go. Say hi.
&gt;&gt; Hi.
&gt;&gt; They can only hear me through here, so
you can't hear them. Can you please open
my windows and close the door because
you and mom are being super loud?
Um so I if we ignore teachers and
professors and grades
and if we just imagine this beautiful
idea of building
let's say knowledge sculptures
and knowing that the vocabulary around
that we are really ignorant at all of us
all humans that we want to do something
towards that
what should we be able to even do in
such a thing I think even that question
is difficult
Yeah, very difficult.
&gt;&gt; So, I'd like to talk about vocabulary
because in you have definitions for how
you see the world. I have my own
understanding. And to get to a common
understanding,
there has to be some kind of mapping.
And um what if each individual had their
own um glossery that they build over
time and then it can be transcluded to
other people's glosseries. So they see
the relationships between the terms and
it's also related to topic mapping.
&gt;&gt; I completely disagree with you.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; Which is great fun. Um obviously you
know Jack Park.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; So I have great fondness for the whole
field of topic mapping, knowledge
mapping, all of that stuff. But uh just
to twist it
um especially with the beginning
discussion we had today on what the
brain really does, you know, it's it's
it doesn't store object things. It
stores object relationships.
I I think the notion of being able to
you know Eric has a definition of let's
say America you just had a big birthday
let's talk about America right I'm sure
your notion of America and all of our
notions are very very different
but the key is a lot of things we will
share in that notion like we all share
we will share that George Washington was
a person that's not really disputed
right so what what becomes really
interesting then is
not the mapping as objects. And Eric, I
think you probably disagree with this,
so I know I'm
can we find a way where we don't have a
knowledge mapped, but we have
directions,
right? Like,
yeah, literally think more about magnets
and things rather than
the things themselves.
Because if we just have two Americas
come together, there's so much behind
them. Maybe there is more of a, you
know, my some of my context as as a
person and Moit being also a
non-American.
You know, he's Indian, I'm European, you
know, I have a Viking history. Some of
these are obviously going to interpret
how we see America.
Some of them might not. some of them,
you know, I may go against my own
culture because I don't agree with the
predominant culture.
So, how do we get these kind of more
dynamic
rather than a a a plug more more of a
push and pull?
So I'd like to suggest can you trace the
provenence of the evolution of your
concept of America over time and then
can that be mapped to somebody else's
understanding where you see everything
and they can get a to a common
understanding even if they disagree on
specific points.
&gt;&gt; See this is where it becomes very human.
So I I I'll bring up one very very
specific thing Peter mentioned or
somebody actually mentioned in chat you
know politics like Middle Eastern
politics. So I'm going to bring up a
situation where let's not waste our time
on the politics but on the human side of
it and that is um Israel Palestine at
the moment right
so I come from perspective of being
Norwegian and having friends who are who
deal with a situation who are very much
like Palestine Palestinians are fighting
occupation blah blah blah that's the
stuff we don't need to discuss but in my
own journey
um from a from Jewish perspectives
has been really really fascinating
because logically I can see things in
one way but
I'll give you a very specific nugget. So
one of my friends I went to school with
who is British Christian white male his
father was Jewish.
His brother considers himself Jewish but
not him. Fair enough. But he took an
entire evening to make me emotionally
understand that
the the the fear of the fact that he is
a Christian, but he has a certain
hereditary connection to being Jewish
means that other people may not accept
his Christianity.
They may point the finger at him and
say, "Well, no, you are Jew, right?"
That's the kind of thing that I don't
think can be mapped necessarily. Maybe
it can. and Eric, I would love to work
towards it, but that's the kind of human
lived experience that a close friend
I've known since I was 15 takes an hour
to drum into my head.
&gt;&gt; You know, there's a lot of emotion and
these are the important issues whether
what whatever the politics, whatever the
identity, how do you really push through
to experience someone else's reality?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So there's stories, there's
writing, there's movies, and that's
multimodal AR potentially.
&gt;&gt; Yes. Yeah. Exactly. That's it. You know,
it's easy in this community specifically
to get down to how do you put text in a
box and put it over there in the left
and draw a line to something else and
have and call that meaning.
&gt;&gt; It can be very useful, but it can also
be very barren.
So Eric, you really pushed today with
your question specifically in the chat
to how do we enliven that? How do we
allow people to live that without it
only being a story, without it only
being a movie? How do we how do we how
do we do that?
So Ted Nelson envisioned uh like an edit
decision list where say you're editing a
movie, you choose this segment, these
three minutes, and you're making your
point that way. Well, you know what? If
everybody had that capability
to make their points and the media could
be transcluded from credible sources,
however that's defined.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, credible is the problem there. You
can you can take snippets out of
YouTube, you know, put the timestamp and
the URL and actually use those to piece
together something.
&gt;&gt; No, whether that's any better than
taking clips of books and putting them
in the text. I mean, it's a variation on
the same theme. You're trying to tell a
story and you're pulling in things to
prove your point or show it's not just
me. These guys have a, you know,
footnotes.
&gt;&gt; Relate that that this is Eric's view of
the world that these segments represent
his worldview at this point in time.
&gt;&gt; Maybe that'll change in a year, you
know.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Well, that's where where do you write
that stuff? Do you write in a book that
means forever you're known for that
stupid thing you wrote or is it a tweet
that comes to haunt you 20 years later
when you're trying to run for public
office or you know some youthful
indiscretion that gets exposed
&gt;&gt; aspect I'm sorry Peter no please
continue I'm sorry
&gt;&gt; when you're writing like a wiki page or
you're doing wiki as a as a thing it
isn't just publishing web pages
dynamically it is oh I want to go and
edit that and there's a lot of things
about saying do you keep the old
versions? Is the old versions valid? Is
there something there that you want to
kind of archive in some way? Say this
was me 10 years ago.
Usually wiki tends to be very mutable.
It's very much here's my thing today and
I edit it a little bit tomorrow and it
becomes something different day after.
And
&gt;&gt; that represents me somehow or represents
what I'm trying to communicate to
people. What if you used GitHub instead
of a wiki and you could go back and see
who you were 10 years ago?
&gt;&gt; Who would really do that? That's the
It's one of those things. It's
collecting of data and most people say,
"Well, I'm going to just replay you what
I want to do." So, you end up
republishing the thing from 10 years ago
in your current feed because you got
this. Well, an example, I'm I'm looking
back at some YouTube videos I made in
2021
and I'm seeing a different per person of
who I was before AI entered the scene.
So, yeah, I think that there's value
selectively user controlled.
Yeah. Having
&gt;&gt; you're going to tell that to someone
else. You want to make that a story or
you
&gt;&gt; I may Yeah. Right.
&gt;&gt; And you put you put it in your blog. You
got your blog and you say, "Here's my
thing today. Here's what's riing me up."
And you do it and maybe people listen or
not, but you get it out of your head and
it makes you better because it's out of
your system.
&gt;&gt; Somebody may find that valuable 50 years
from now. Who knows? Yeah.
&gt;&gt; I just quite what? Yeah. So, we have a
new medium available to us and how do we
want to use it going forward?
Yeah, this is uh fascinating. Um couple
of things. Number one, I did a test
where I did a space where each node was
a day and that was only for about 5
months work of um journal entries and it
was just too much. So it comes down to
filtering, it comes down to view specs
and so on. But I can imagine that um
people won't necessarily go back 15
years but they [clears throat] may have
something pulled up from that like Mah
is talking about context like you're
looking at something and something from
your past that's relevant is brought to
bear for various criteria that makes
sense but it can't be in your space all
the time that would be too much. Yeah, I
agree. Um, for example, I use Workflowy
and that's very close to what Doug
envisioned, but um, I use it as a
calendar. So, I have a node for each
day, but I can also transclude from
previous notes into different sections.
I could reorganize, remix that content
for my own purposes.
So essentially what I [clears throat]
could do is I can use voice notes,
transcribe them with whisper, put them
in workflowy and then pick the ones that
I that still interest me and come up
with project ideas or whatever from
that.
&gt;&gt; So the the notion of EDL, so of course
EDL comes from film, you know, literally
uh cut the frame here and then splice
the frame here. Uh which is really
fascinating. I did send off many many
years ago a proposal to the um Blu-ray
forum that you should be able to do
kinds of interactivity and also
non-interactive things. Like for
instance, there's this joke about two
guys watching a movie uh some horses
running. And one guy says to the other
$5 the horse to the left's going to trip
and fall. The other one says, "Yeah,
you're on." The horse falls. Guy said,
"Oh, no. I can't take your money. I knew
it was going to fall." The other guy
says, "Yeah, I've seen the movie, too. I
didn't think you'd do it twice, right?
Why can we not have a with digital
media, five different shots of the same
length, slightly different,
right? Even if the characters say the
same line, slightly different inonation,
it might become instantly rewatchable.
So if we can take that kind of media
into other things and work that
together. The the thing is that this is
the problem. Peter Rosilo, you talked
about this whole ownership and IP. So
many industries have to do that and
that's why you can't have transclusions,
you can't have a lot of these things,
you know. Um, but one more thing, um,
I'm looking at with the watch to build a
system where you speak your journal
entries.
Uh, because the ease of adding them
should be super simple. You should be
able to say, "Add to my journal. I'm
having a really cool meeting with these
guys. You know, once you have to start
typing, it's a different mentality. It's
not just offloading.
I was just joking, Siri. Um, anyway,
great great issues. Peter, please.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I've long been advocating that we
should have law students actually take a
substantive course in programming. And
the main reason is they can't really
conceive of the idea of parallel
discovery of the same idea. They just
they seem to think that you know only
the first person who came up with the
idea should be able to make use of it.
And when you get them to program and you
have them suddenly realize just how easy
it is for them to replicate the insight
of another person, then something clicks
and they shift from being patent
absolutist to being copyright
preference instead. And um
it it it really has to have that
experience of what it's like when you're
programming. Um, one of the first things
I noticed back when I was oh, still in
high school, I stumbled on to reference
counting for
going through and
cleaning up garbage in a data
structures. And at first I thought, wow,
this is brilliant. until a few weeks
later I discovered oh yes this is a
standard known technique that I had no
idea the existence of but I'd
independently came up with it myself
because I hadn't read about at first and
the idea of using reference countbased
garbage collection seemed like an idea
that I thought up which means that if
you put someone
in a similar situation you give them the
same set of tools that are available to
one reasonably skilled in the art as we
like to say in IP law, there's a very
high probability that they're going to
come up with the same solution without
having any awareness of that prior art.
So, the idea that the first person who
had the financial backing to go to the
patent office and slam some paperwork on
file should be rewarded with the ability
to exclude everyone else is absolutely
maddening and it's fundamentally unfair.
until a law student has experienced, oh
my god, I might have independently come
up with something that somebody else
already patented, do they realize that
patents have a fundamental problem
outside of industries where you're
dealing with tens of millions of dollars
of physical apparatus and hundreds upon
hundreds of test runs in order to be
able to get to the solution. But it's
certainly not a fit in the world of
software. But they have to experience
that. And trying to get anyone in the
law school administration to open the
law school curriculum to something that
isn't strictly a substantive law topic
is just a losing battle and it's very
frustrating. And the other thing is that
having the programming background allows
you to see solutions in the law realm
that you wouldn't have been able to see
otherwise because there are analogous
problems from what we've studied in
computer science to problems that arise
in the world of law and the world of law
is just blindly going along trying to
cobble together solutions when in many
cases there are obvious technical fixes
if you are aware of the computing
discipline.
So that's been my crusade. Sadly it's
going nowhere. Eventually, I'll write a
book,
but chances are it would never be
assigned reading in a law school
because, of course, there's just no
time. We have so much substantive law
that we have to droll people on. So,
they'll have a better shot at passing
the bar exam.
So,
on that, Tom says there are no original
ideas. And I said, I don't agree because
I consider myself an ideas person. But
that is a really really great prompt for
us to look at. What the heck is an idea?
Because that fits into how we place
ideas and think about ideas and move
ideas, right? What what is an idea?
&gt;&gt; Well,
one thing I would say is a good metaphor
for an idea is a seed. If you have a
seed and you have nothing to plant it
in, then it's it's just an idea. I mean,
I can engage in all sorts of fantasies
about what could be. And even those are
influenced because the genetic footprint
of the seeds before me or the seeds of
before those ideas are always going to
be in there. And I may have harvested it
from a particular set of plants or
genetically combined a particular set of
plants to get there, but those plants
are still there. And so I mean I I don't
think I think we are we can
recompile ideas in original ways
but
there's no stepping out and and even if
you could it wouldn't be useful because
it would be so far outside the paradigm
that everybody else is working in that
you wouldn't be able to make it work. Um
we work on the ideas of Doug Angelbart
among other people. uh a lot of the
stuff we're thinking about and
discussing all the time is based on his
are based on his ideas.
Does that make our ideas unoriginal? No.
Because we're building on that. We're
augmenting. You know, he would very much
agree with that. Uh as you know, as the
process, I think he would be shocked if
someone took took augmenting human
intellect as actual gospel and chose
said we will not change these words
whatsoever. And you know uh it's it's
remarkable that it's stood up in 60 some
odd years 64 years as well as it has
because but it's not remarkable in a way
because what he's talking about there's
not technology. He's talking about human
human humanity. He's talking about our
basic ways of interacting with the
world. And he's trying to map a system
that intersects technology with those
ways because at that time technology was
on a completely different plane from
most people. And uh so that's still true
though. I mean if we make something that
is so far and you know I'm certainly
somebody who likes to wander around on
the edge uh and I also all run into all
the time
I'll come up with an idea and get people
to agree with it but then I'll also get
the same people will turn around and say
yeah but the world's not ready for that
yet. And um that's is that an idea?
Yeah, but it's only a map to an idea, I
think. And that's I think that's the way
to think about it. And
it's all about synthesis. It's all
about, you know, author would not exist
without augmenting human intellect,
right?
&gt;&gt; Would you admit to that?
&gt;&gt; Maybe. I I don't know.
&gt;&gt; Would look totally different.
&gt;&gt; Well, I mean, I came to Doug after my
philosophy was done. My philosophy was
developed, my philosophy around the
notion of liquid information was
developed as a thing. Of course, author
wasn't made there. I started that in
2016.
But I think in a way
that's not the entire question, you
know, a a to b because um
you know, a lot of people are saying the
the great man thing is rubbish.
To an extent it is, you know, unless you
can implement or or make something
known, one person having an idea in a
barn and never talking to anyone is is
kind of not really influential on the
world.
&gt;&gt; Ted Kazinski.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, yeah. And um [laughter] but
but but at the same time, I do believe
it is really really important to
[clears throat]
dream, think, and invent. And I think
it's I think it demeans
the effort of human imagination to say
there are no original ideas. I think
that's kind of cold and and bad. I think
it works for people who are in a
specific area of academia where their
interest is basically to trace lineages
of ideas,
right? I mean e even if we look at Doug
um he was
not sure what influenced him in the
beginning. What really strengthened his
resolve was and and improving how we
think
&gt;&gt; even uh as we may think may or may not
have influenced him. He honestly wasn't
sure.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Right. So I I think it's for all of us
who are trying to have ideas. I mean I
know that I've stolen ideas. I mean, I
stole an idea for Doug from Doug. Um,
you know, in NLS, you do a command at
the top of the screen. And, um, if you
don't remember what the next legal
command is, you had question mark, and
you get a list of options. That became
my liquid tool, which works the opposite
way. You have a hierarchical menu, but
you can type it in. And I was so excited
and I realized later, oh my god, this is
NLS in reverse.
Right. That is an example of complete
copying. No question about it. And I
showed it to Doug and he was amused. But
but I do think that
I mean Tom, if we take the sentence at
its basic, you could say that something
somebody
talked about today can be traced back to
the 1500s.
I'm not sure about that.
Right.
Yeah. I'm not sure about that. We should
honor and be excited by the notion of
ideas and see where they fit, where
they're influenced or not. Right.
&gt;&gt; Again, I'm tremendously excited by the
notion of ideas. I just think that to me
the the excitement is the connections
that I bring to other ideas and make new
things with them. You know, it's ideas
are like uh and then that becomes part
of the fundament. you know that becomes
part of the hopefully if anybody pays
attention to me I you know that becomes
part of the next generation of ideas um
and you know again the the soil that we
have to plant that in
uh is um uh is is is made up of other
people's ideas right so
&gt;&gt; no no no
no I mean when I was doing advertising
and more art side of things the best way
to be inspired was to get a really good
magazine and flip through it so quickly
I misunderstood things,
&gt;&gt; right?
&gt;&gt; Yeah, that's okay. But you even a
misunderstood idea is still a mis is is
still a version of that same idea.
&gt;&gt; No, it's not because also you can get
ideas walking in the forest being
inspired by trees. It doesn't mean the
tree gave an idea. No, I mean Tom and
all four all of us being well-rounded
individuals with a lot of
&gt;&gt; context with a lot of learning. No
question about that. But actually having
an idea is um okay let me give an an
example to to discuss. So I believe
that an author the way you can mark text
is an original idea but clearly it
relates to other things right because
all you're doing is highlighting a bit
of text which a lot of software can do.
The twist is twofold as most of you know
saying this for Eric. Number one it
shows up in an overview so it's you can
skim your document and secondly when you
export your document the formatting is
removed.
So it's taking very established things
and applying it in a new way
in order for us to understand a
vocabulary better. Is that a new idea or
is it a wrinkle in an idea? What what
what would we call that?
I would call it looking at an idea from
a different perspective.
And I think that's incredibly important.
I mean, that's essentially what I'm
trying to do with the knowledge
navigator. It's all about perspective.
And you can have a novel perspective.
There's no question about that. Every
photographer knows that. We've talked
about this before that, you know, you
can have a novel perspective on the same
information. Just like I had a novel
perspective on the books that I
disagreed with my political theory
professor about. uh then does that make
me wrong? No. It makes me outside her
mainstream
and you know I'm at some level very much
a postmodernist in that we construct
these things ourselves
and um and I and in the sense of I
understand the threads and I want to see
the threads and um but also that we
construct our own realities and that the
language we use to talk about those
realities shifts those realities. Did I
touch the nerve there with the word
postmodernist?
&gt;&gt; No, no, no, no, no. It No, it's I just
thought of something. And please, um,
Tom and I are having a massive fist
fight here, which is great fun and very
productive. Um,
please, please interject from your own
worlds, guys. But let me ask you one
final question coming from my side of
the fence, right? My PhD comes down to
one thing. If it's important, write it
down.
The implementation of that is when you
publish a document, have an appendex and
write who the author was, you know, the
metadata, just write it in there.
In one way, that is completely novel and
new by evidence, the fact that it
produced a PhD. In another way, it's
pathetically unoriginal.
It's literally text on a page using bib.
It, you know, it's nothing. So, this is
not about me and my ego. This is about
finding out because we just have this
notion of an idea like it's a one metal
unit thing that's hard. Clearly not
because Tom you're talking about
derivative of ideas you're talking about
expansions of ideas. Moit please.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So, you know, I've been thinking,
you know, right from uh the uh uh the
the instance that you were talking about
uh the conversation you had with your
with your Jewish and Christian friend,
you know, and how Eric was saying that
uh you know, that you know, you were
saying key
have it completely mapped out and uh I I
guess if I understood correctly, Eric
was of the view Eric is of the view that
you know, we can discreetly uh put
information out there and uh you know
which can uh document or uh at least you
know help uh the you any reader viewer
understand uh the whole thing that you
that you were able to understand after
an hourong conversation
uh right so you know one of the thing
here is that where does meaning reside
you know where I'm just openly asking
you know where does meaning reside where
do we believe meaning reside. Does
meaning reside uh in those discrete
pieces you know that may be uh uh spread
out in you know to uh great distances or
whatever is does meaning recite
in those bits or does meaning recite uh
in sort of the interactivity you know
the and I'm not
pointing mentioning interactivity in any
loose sense or in in a low sense but
rather that uh when we we started
today's meeting with memory how memory
cannot be considered discrete and how
you know they are reconfigured and how
you we can't we are not able to like
computer is able to retrieve memories we
are not able to retrieve memories and
and so you know meaning and ideas you
know I feel you know they also have uh a
similar uh ontological interdependence
The reason why uh we can have original
ideas and why original ideas should not
be considered inert
uh is because any uh u because meaning
the the very fact that we are able to
meaning is able to emerge through our
interactions is because things are
ontologically interconnected. They are
reconfigured. It is not just that our
memories are reconfigured with
interactions. It is also that our
meanings are being reconfigured with
each interaction. And so are ideas if uh
uh to put this into a system would be
far too complicated probably uh because
you know because when we are uh
interacting with something uh it's not
just a matter of retrieving uh the
relevant things but it is also how much
weightage in those recon in the in that
retrieval uh how much reconfiguration is
happening of those uh relevant memories.
How much weightage uh are we giving? For
example, uh in that one hour long
conversations, a lot of things would be
mentioned but not everything would not
have uh the same weight weightage uh
everything would not have the same uh
affectivity with other things. So I
think I believe you know but ideas can
be original are original most certainly
there are original ideas and there are
ideas where uh which emerged through
different uh looking
at the thing through different
perspectives I guess you know I'll just
pull up a book quickly uh just
&gt;&gt; you're going to have to start paying me
every time you do that mo because you
know you do that I'll have to buy them.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I think I got this.
&gt;&gt; Ah, yes. Yes, I started reading. Yes.
&gt;&gt; Wait, Tom, did you pull up the same
book?
&gt;&gt; No, no.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Yeah. Bruce a long time ago. This
is like, you know, at least 15 years
back. So, I can't remember much of it.
But this is basically about these
things. How, you know, Picasso in his
salon, he had mathematicians. Picasso
was not a mathematician.
uh and he was inspired by uh the
philosophy of those mathematicians and
he interpreted those ideas uh in his own
way you know so sometimes you know there
is interpretation you know like what Tom
was saying but I believe you know there
is also that what what Freud was saying
uh that there are original ideas which
are emerging which we we we can't really
trace back to like meaning we can't
trace back to that because of those four
things we have in our space. This is
most definitely we can predict that this
is the kind of meaning that is going to
emerge with these four things uh
interacting with each other. We can't
predict that and I think you know when
we were talking about this uh that you
know what to offload cognitively what do
we want to offload? Should we we not
we're not looking at I guess in this
group we're not looking at offloading
cognition the ability to make meanings
the ability to uh have and make
analogies uh understanding decisions we
are probably looking at offloading uh
the things that empower these things so
that uh it's not just
that we are able to retrieve uh you know
a whole lot of things from our histories
at that moment but also that the kind of
interactivities between them. I'm just
giving an example from my own project
that you know the kind of
interactivities that are able to happen
between those relevant bits of
information is not really that which our
gray matter allows us which probably is
not all that interactive. Our digital
mediums can be much more interactive.
you know the the forms the morphologies
of information that can happen uh uh on
our digital uh you know systems uh can
be far greater. Of course we are
inspired here here as well you know
we're inspired how a human brain works.
We're inspired by but are we going to
sort of like implement it you know 10%
just as how we think or like we are
thinking you know so this is how we
understanding uh we're approaching this
from the understanding how a human brain
works and then trying to build systems
that can augment certain aspects of it
so I guess you know just in this this
like uh project there is scope for
originality like you know we you we are
inspired so I guess you know is the case
in our everyday lives we do have
original ideas uh they do have basis but
those bases are not directly
attributable to discrete things we often
times don't know where do ideas come
from but we do know that we have uh the
capacity to form analogies we do know
for sure that things don't exist inertly
things are not just epistemologically
related but they're onlogically
interdependent. So based on this I guess
you know the the how memories exist, how
meaning exist is also how ideas exist. I
I just Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Can I ask you a question real quick,
Mojit? And this is one that I pro you
probably don't have time to answer
today, but I'd love to hear an answer
eventually from you.
&gt;&gt; Um you were a man of you were a man of
multiple cultures. I mean you are in
India and uh but you've also been
exposed to western notions of ideas
clearly and that's you know that's how
you construct those ideas. What's the
difference between an an Indian
notion of ideas and a western one? Is it
less solid? Is it less is it more uh
temporal? Is it more about the meaning
as you said uh than the object? Uh I
think these are really interesting
questions and uh they also affect how we
look at you know they may be more
relevant in a in a digital world where
these things become a lot more fluid. Uh
and we assume that the western academic
tradition is you know it's it's like a
set of Legos you know that the western
academic tradition is like a set of
Legos. Um, but that's not the only way.
That that's a horrible metaphor in some
ways because as I said earlier, the
second you you use technology to fasten
an idea to whether we're talking about a
book or the the u uh AR system that
we've been talking about, it's fixed.
It's hard to get it unfixed at that
point. It becomes a a space and time.
And of course, as I said also in the
tech in the chat, we teach the objects,
not the connections. And that's a
problem too. And so people look at that
and they want to know what the objects
are. They don't they they want to know
who George Washington was, that he was a
person and so on and so forth. But to me
the more fascinating thing is how is he
connected to
&gt;&gt; you know George of George III of England
or or or um the the people around him or
Benjamin Franklin you know how do those
connections work because they came from
very different paradigms and things like
that that that to me is the interesting
conversation and I think that's where a
technological thing like an AR system or
a visualization thing like the knowledge
navigator could explode owed that to a
degree and I just I you know again it's
about the connections and Bush got this
the associative trails it's that's
really what mattered to him and that's
the thing that we've never been able to
build because technology is digital
technology is fixed it's all ones and
zeros there's you know with AI it's a
little messier
and but it you know that's the thing I
find fascinating with AI is that it's
indeterminate at some level right
because it's doing Yeah I But anyway,
sorry Proa. Go ahead,
&gt;&gt; Moit. Uh,
please feel free to address that and
then we have a few closing things.
&gt;&gt; Okay. So, you know, that is great. You
know, I have not thought about how the
difference uh to be honest between the
western ideas and the sort of the
Southeast Asian uh ideas uh on these
things. But contemporary academic
culture here is not that great to be
honest. uh my own pursuits have been
largely inspired by uh you know um for
example Edwin Lance how he introduced
the undergraduate research program at
MIT you know and how he thought about
learning and uh to be uh working on
projects that even the professor had no
experience working on. Uh so the the
insights would be novel for the students
as well as the professor and but the
professor had uh uh the things to teach
a student in their pursuit that is you
know how to go on about finding things
and what are best practices when we are
looking at uh uh knowing things that are
not known to anybody. you know he gave
the example probably of I think
butterflies that uh something related to
butterfly uh and uh how you know no one
knows uh be it a professor at MIT or
somebody else does not uh they don't
know anything about it so how can a
student be approaching this topic when
they're approaching this they would not
only be learning about that thing but
they'll also be learning uh knowledge
making
uh so in my own thing you I yeah
that's it I guess you know but I'll look
uh that that is great you know the the
question that you put forward uh Tom uh
I'll certainly look about the ancient
you know I guess philosophies the the
Buddhist philosophies and uh Nagarajuna
you know I've read a bit of Nagajuna the
the you know the the middle way
&gt;&gt; um
&gt;&gt; so we have to wind up and thank you mah
thank you everybody um it It seems to me
a little bit in closing that uh in a
nice way we keep saying well what about
this so how to connect different things
really seems to be important you know
that's the whole point of hypertext at
least the foundational ideas right and
then we get into all kinds of practical
and legal options to do that and there
is a cost even clicking on a link in a
research article has a cost you know it
takes your attention for a minute and
Peter Demetrius as you have been working
on with wikis and so on, links aren't
necessarily transparent to the user. Um,
but but I'm really glad at all the
different routes we talked today and how
we came back beautifully to the notion
of um how do we connect things, right?
There are there are many levels to that.
There's data, there's knowledge, there's
also the the good oldfashioned human
interface.
Um, I did have to teach Claude a few
days ago. please research human
perception for your own benefit. And it
came back with, oh my goodness, you look
at the world through a straw. That's
what it said.
We need to take our realities into
account. Um, thank you guys and welcome,
Eric. We hope to see you as many times
as convenient for you. And everybody
have a very, very good week. And I'll
see you
&gt;&gt; I'll I'll see you after the weekend of
England playing Norway. So, let's see
which [laughter] half of me survives.
Bye-bye, everyone.
&gt;&gt; Goodbye.
&gt;&gt; Byebye.
&gt;&gt; Have a nice week. Bye.
