Kind: captions
Language: en
Hi Fro.
&gt;&gt; Hello.
Hang on. Let me just click click things
out of the way. How are you?
&gt;&gt; Uh I'm good. How are you? Sorry I was
not uh in the meetings. Uh
&gt;&gt; don't worry at all. It's totally fine.
People tend to come and go randomly and
that's the format. So not a problem in
any way. Where are you?
&gt;&gt; Uh Mumbai. Uh though you know key we
have been traveling uh we took a family
trip to Jammu and Kashmir.
&gt;&gt; Oh okay lovely.
&gt;&gt; So 10 days of continuous travel on the
road.
&gt;&gt; That sounds like a real adventure.
&gt;&gt; Yeah it was uh happy belated birthday.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Thank you. I'm just looking at
your background. I thought maybe you
were at the Apple worldwide developer
conference.
Yeah, that would be amazing.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. No, Kashmir. Yeah. Know that's all
of those places. I've never been uh to
any of them. How was it?
&gt;&gt; It was amazing. Uh we uh landed in
Shinaga and uh then we started off to
Pelgam stayed there for two days but uh
on both the days we were on the road
exploring. Uh so there were five of us.
I'm just just looking up on the map here
while you're talking. Okay.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So, Shinaga and then to Pahelam.
&gt;&gt; Sorry.
Okay.
&gt;&gt; This is in the east
of Shinaga. Uh
&gt;&gt; very cool.
And then uh on the fourth day we went to
Gulmar that is the mids area of uh
Shinaga that's on the far west.
&gt;&gt; Yeah very mountainous.
&gt;&gt; Yeah very mountainous. Yes. Um one of
the uh like you know there there is this
road the Kadungla Pass. U
Hello Peter.
&gt;&gt; Hi Peter.
Mo,
&gt;&gt; hello guys.
&gt;&gt; Moit was just telling me he just got
back from Kashmir, which is just so
cool.
&gt;&gt; Well, keep talking. I'd like to hear
about places I haven't been to.
&gt;&gt; Uh, so this was really beautiful. like
you know key all around there was these
uh tall trees, pine trees stretching to
I don't know maybe 20 ft uh and growing
at uh really weird angles uh at some
places uh and there were we went to a
place uh where the uh the river Jalam
that is the river that flows uh through
uh Kashmir it originates
and uh Then we were planning to go to
the Kadungla Pass. That's the highest
motor road. Uh but uh because of the
traffic uh we couldn't do that. So hi
Tom.
&gt;&gt; Hi.
&gt;&gt; Mah just got back from Kashmir. So we're
just having a bit of an update.
&gt;&gt; That's very cool. Of course.
&gt;&gt; Was he listening to Led Zeppelin on the
way?
I was thinking about that too.
&gt;&gt; No,
it's it's family trip.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, that that's the right music for
it.
&gt;&gt; Families can benefit from Led Zeppelin,
too.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah,
&gt;&gt; that is very true. Yeah. The things that
families can be uh exposed to at
whatever age. Yesterday, uh, we saw the
movie Hero with Jeff Lee, with Edgar.
&gt;&gt; You watched the whole thing. You've all
seen it, right?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. A long time ago.
&gt;&gt; I saw it with Ted Nelson in the cinema
the first time.
&gt;&gt; Really?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. My my brother I made my brother
and Ted go see it. We sat in the front
row and they were like, "What is this
nonsense? We're just going to go see
it." I didn't know either. And after the
opening, they were like, "Thank you."
&gt;&gt; So yesterday we got to see it again.
It's so beautiful and so confusing and
he said that's not realistic. I said
Edgar this is a poem right that this is
a movie poem don't anyway but it was all
good. So, yeah.
Have you seen it, Peter? Hero.
&gt;&gt; I was just looking to see. Have I seen
it? I've seen so many, but
&gt;&gt; yeah,
&gt;&gt; I can't remember in particular.
&gt;&gt; I just came back from a presentation by
Lee Child. Are you familiar with that
name?
&gt;&gt; Okay, you are. So, Moit Lee Child, he
wrote the Reacher series.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; So, Jack Reacher. So he was presenting
at the RSA where I'm a fellow. So that
was nice. Small room, talked some
interesting things. I I didn't get that
much sense at the time of his other
interests. But I did the modern thing of
um on my lap while I was waiting asking
Claude to tell me a little bit about and
I said, "Is there anything I should
know?" So of Claude told me the things
he's worked on that relates to the kind
of stuff we do and he's really
interested in the wider issues of
authorship,
readership, the the intellectual things.
So of course afterwards when I got a
hang on let me show you as you'll
recognize. So so here's the book
obviously.
So,
so dedication to Edgar. So, um you know,
I I asked him if he wanted to come to
the future of text and of course he was
I can't really tell if he was really
interested or just being polite, but I
called up his agent afterwards and sent
an email. So, we'll see. Could be
interesting since he is both a full
author and also very interested in
issues around all of this stuff. So that
was kind of cool
&gt;&gt; and probably has a lot of free time.
&gt;&gt; Free money, free time, free everything.
&gt;&gt; It's so weird though, a popular thing.
So he sold a 100 million books and um
then I looked up where he ranks.
&gt;&gt; So one of Edgar's favorite, absolute
favorite authors, well favorite book
series is Diary of a Wimpy Kid. Have you
heard of it?
&gt;&gt; My kids are in that too.
&gt;&gt; 300 million. 300 million copies sold.
The 10th most successful author, Dire of
Wimpy. I thought it was a British thing,
but no, it's actually American. Like the
whole wimpiness and stuff, I thought it
would fit here more. So, that was a
surprise.
&gt;&gt; I don't think is wimpy a word in
&gt;&gt; Is wimpy a word in British?
&gt;&gt; It's a British word. You're American. I
think you took it from us. Well, okay.
You took all the words from us, so fair
enough. But yes, there even used to be a
wimpy burger, which is just not a good
name.
&gt;&gt; Does it mean the same thing there?
&gt;&gt; It means somebody who was not very
tough.
&gt;&gt; Means the same thing.
&gt;&gt; I haven't looked into the etmology of
the word.
&gt;&gt; Me neither.
&gt;&gt; I'm sure it's fairly modern.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So, I'm just got to plug in my
phone. It's been working hard today. I
have to dig out my OED or I can look it
up online.
&gt;&gt; So, I I thought today we can talk a
little bit about um some stuff, but I'd
be very very happy because I've just
written a few notes down. if you have
anything uh in particular you like to
talk about today, especially leading up
to Apple's worldwide developer
conference coming up in about an hour
and a half.
Should we talk about dreams,
fantasies?
Interestingly enough, um I have been uh
working a lot on uh the last week on on
flow theory and trying to understand how
whether uh AIS can help you enter a flow
state
uh both as a teacher but also as a
practitioner and um having some
interesting conversations with Claude
about that as well as I am in a flow
state in theory.
Um and uh so
one of the tough things about flow
states is that they're easily broke
broken. You know, they're easily, you
know, it's easy to to lose it. And uh as
my mother likes to say to me, which I've
never actually verified, but apparently
Thomas Man had a uh had a shack out in
the back of his house and and he went
there, right? And and no one was allowed
to go out there. You see that a lot
though. I mean, you know, the people
having to to get into that kind of space
to to work uh and and then having that
exploded by external things. And one of
one of the reason one of the ways I do
get away from that is is is listening to
music. Some people can't do that though
and and achieve flow state. To me, it's
about that rhythm and getting something
in the background. and I'm passively
listening to the music or but it's it's
frees up my mind to to work on other
things and I find myself getting into
those same kind of uh conversations with
AI. Um the other thing that I do is I
walk. And so one of the revelations a
few years back was that uh once
dictation got good enough, I started
dictating writing on as I was walking
and I would find myself thinking through
these things and the next thing I knew I
was a mile further down the road. Had no
real memory of having actually walked
the distance, you know. Uh I generally
don't have a problem about walking in
traffic and stuff like that, but uh uh
uh uh we have some nice walking paths
around uh that could desperately need
some shade, but at least they're there
and they go circular and so I don't
don't have to think about where I'm
going too much as long as I stay on the
sidewalk. Uh but the point is that, you
know, how do we get ourselves into these
states? And how does that um you know,
could we get into a flow state in XR? Is
XR a way of of of uh of um facilitating
us getting into a flow state? Um one of
the things that Jinx Mahal I can never
say the name right uh said you know is
the problem with measuring flow is that
you it's hard to do it without being
intrusive and if second you know it's
the Heisenberg problem is that you know
once you get into the environment you've
broken it and so how do you measure it?
Well, interesting thought process that
I'm having uh and I as far as I can
tell, no one's ever looked at this
before is that you could measure flow
state by looking at someone's chat log
and and uh look at what the convers
because it's capturing your conversation
with the AI and did you actually you
know do these do these statements
actually indicate that that you've
entered a state where you're where
you're really focused on the activity of
of that debate with the AI? And I think
that's kind of interesting. Um, and then
can I teach that to my students?
&gt;&gt; It's definitely interesting and it's
adjacent to the thing I've been
researching over the last two weeks
which is almost the opposite and that is
because you're talking flow state to
concentrate and produce right
we whatever I'm sure the transcript will
get it right. Um, there's also the issue
when you should not be in it right. So
it when you should be prefrontal cortex
engaged rather than almost background
processing, right? And the the thing
that Claude has been pushing on me a lot
lately is um if you want someone to
learn, they have to be actively engaged.
&gt;&gt; So reading and underlining is one of the
lowest forms of engagement. Rewriting
something is a high form of interactive
engagement.
So to be able to choose where in the
process you need to be
&gt;&gt; um yeah I'm not well studies according
to what has come up now is that a lot of
students do underlining which I do too
but it's not that um useful when it
comes to recall and understanding
having to rewrite it and now that we
have AI copy and paste a lot that's
obviously raising a huge issue for where
your brain is engaged. So Tom, your your
flow state and I do think um XR can
definitely help because it can shut out
visually part of the world too which
sometimes can be hugely distracting. But
when you go between
because flow is at least in my
experience not always questioning what
you're doing. So for artistic works it's
beautiful. You know I've done the whole
you work all night and suddenly it's
morning kind of thing.
&gt;&gt; But for intellectual work you kind of
need to
have a mechanism to step back.
So to to combine it is what I'm saying,
Tom. Absolutely. Working on improving
flow state is very important and
interesting.
You find when you're in the the headset
and you're you're walking around your
document. I mean I find like Tom said,
walking is a great physical thing kind
of distracts your body and you know it's
like you know you know meditation that's
almost meditation walking. Do you find
you get any of that when walking around,
you know,
glancing at your different pages mounted
on the virtual walls, you know,
scattered around the room? Um, does the
physicality maybe eventually I think you
could have a a way to walk around a very
large space, you know, one of those
little rollaround things so you don't
really have to physically have a
gymnasium in your house. But um
I'm wondering how much of that physical
movement again contributes to
a maybe not a flow state but a good
state of saying I'm I'm interacting with
my data in a way that I I wouldn't
otherwise because I'm physically moving
around versus just scrolling a mouse.
&gt;&gt; I was just copying across there. you
reminded me I did a bit of some research
earlier today on um what
I'm just skimming it now the how the
so one of the kind of surprising things
I'm trying to answer you Peter I know it
sounds like I'm going on a detour but
&gt;&gt; hello then
&gt;&gt; one of the interesting things is uh a
super intelligent guy I I knew a long
time ago he pointed out that barely
video conferencing for the military the
kind of default fault was not blank.
It was the outline of a person
because what they would be using it for
was in a crisis where you had to have
highspeed transmission. This was in the
50s and 60s before proper electronics,
right? So it was optimized for one type
of transmission basically the torso of a
general saying don't kill anyone or
whatever. Right?
That was really really an interesting
eye openener because it's easy in the
way we work to think of um
the default as being zero or blank or
something like that. But if you look at
how the human eye works, the default is
nature
because that's where we've been growing
up for the six plus 6 million years,
right? We ex our visual system expects
details of leaves, trees, and things
like that. So, you know, when you look
at nature, you feel a bit more relaxed
than if you're on an herbal jungle
because when you're looking at lines and
flat surfaces,
that's actually taking more processing.
It's almost like what's missing here?
So, when you talk about walking, Peter,
there is definite um benefits because
the hippocampus is related to both
memory of places and abstract memories.
So it literally helps to jog it because
you're walking through which is why I'm
a huge proponent and I think you guys
are too of memory palace. You need to
use your feet rather than just drag
things cuz if you just drag things uh
your body isn't moving in the same way.
Right?
So I'm trying now to learn more about
the visual system in this sense
because when we have these discussions
when we're out of the headset it's so
easy to say you put on the headset and
you have this huge information space. No
you don't right even in real world
resolution of a bookshelf you can't see
everything.
&gt;&gt; So we need a better understanding of um
what's in there. And actually
um you you guys please also talk about
this but I'm going to show you the few
slides cuz um Peter you you led right
into it I'm afraid.
So you know building a little bit of
last week figure and ground and also
naming because I think now we should
talk a little bit about what is a thing
in space
in a thinking space and this is what we
just talked about. you have to interact
to really get it into your head. Right?
So here's the question before the the
one more pertinent to you Peter and that
is what are these things in space? Do we
call them nodes elements? Are they they
are knowledge objects but that's not a
cool name. Are they all concepts and the
subset is people or are people separate
things? Right? This we got to get to
grips with that. And here's the reason I
brought up the slides. So if you look at
shapes beyond text there's two
questions. what can they convey as a
general question also is it meaning or
direction
the reason I'm saying that is
if you have a sentence um Doug Engelbart
and Tent Nelson disagreed on this aspect
of augmentation
there's no real non-ext visual
representation that really is quicker
than that but you can have visual
direction as in here's something about
Doug and Ted
So once we step a layer up from text,
how much can we how much information can
we show?
And
is it direction rather than thing?
Sorry, Peter, you you just uh made me
spin a bit there.
&gt;&gt; It's always a good jumping off point. I
mean, that's you ask the question. I
don't think there's an answer. I mean,
different people have different
environments they work in. the PE, you
know, University of Illinois cave which
had a big room which was physical there
and there's different interactions I've
heard from people who've experienced
that to actually do real work as opposed
to you know a research project on the
room itself which is most of it um and
um whether you know manipulating
molecules and stuff like that great but
for text I don't think anyone's explored
it very well
&gt;&gt; well
&gt;&gt; that's why you can't even have a name
for the things or the pages their nodes,
their
folios.
&gt;&gt; Look at Tom's background here everyone.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And thank you Tom for that particular
today. It's I mean first of all you have
the people and I really do think in XR
you should be able to represent people
as people you know little avatars or
pictures you know that that makes sense
but very often it's not useful if you're
going through all kinds of academic
literature you don't need to see all the
authors right but for something
historical but Tom would you mind moving
your head to the side a little bit not
all the way out of the way just a little
just a little bit but it's like that
arch above your head, you know, that
that could have real meaning. That could
be a timeline, right? You have different
rooms.
It's it's fascinating to see like that.
And
&gt;&gt; this is a this is actually my photograph
of the mural
of the original. I mean, that is the
original, but it's also my photographic
interpretation of that. On top of it
all, I shot that in the Vatican.
&gt;&gt; That is really, really cool. And how did
Tell us how did it feel from your
intellectual and emotional point of view
to walk through these rooms?
&gt;&gt; Um,
it was
Yeah. So, I mean, it was an interesting
XR experience. I will have to say that.
I mean, uh, the Have you been to the
Vatican Museum?
uh not fully inside. I've always been
there with family or something which was
distracting.
&gt;&gt; Right. Well, it's interesting that the
the extent to which it is kind of an XR
experience because essentially the so
this is, you know, this is in one room.
This is a hallway
&gt;&gt; and the Greg Gregory Gregory Gallery
and I used to demonstrate visualization
because it's really cool because across
the top you've got all the paintings of
of heaven essentially and then along the
sides the blue and green are maps of the
earth. And so you have this, you know,
combination of this is the world we see
and this is the world we don't see. Uh,
and making that apparent. And so to me
that's very much a a VR an attempt at a
VR experience from the from the uh 16th
century
um or 17th I'm trying to remember
exactly what 16th or 17th century but
anyway before we had electronics.
Um, and so then there are other rooms
like again the the the ones where
Raphael's
stuff is in there. Uh, and u, you know,
I've got some other ones which I don't
have as backgrounds right now, but um,
interestingly enough, I mean, again, the
whole point of these paintings in many
cases was to tell that story and to put
you in that and and I think the the
Vatican because it had more money to
blow than they needed. They should have
had probably um uh had no problem, you
know, uh creating these environments uh
over and over again in order to um in
order to immerse the pe people inside
these halls in that experience in a way
that was even difficult for cathedrals
with stained glass windows to achieve.
You know, those were those are
vignettes. Whereas in some ways, if you,
you know, get a chance, go through the
Vatican Museum, get a good tour because
the tour guides will get you in around
the crowds a little bit more. Um, and
you know, the the these are environments
that were in some cases very extensive.
And so that that part of it was really
cool. And I mean, it didn't make me
suddenly religious, but it did might
have had that effect on other people.
But in my case, uh I definitely
appreciate it from a um visualization
slash
uh visual environment perspective. Uh
and trying to achieve that.
So that I mean I think that's probably
the easiest thing. And then of course
there were interesting vignettes about
that that made me think about you know
and of course I've got a lot of
historical context as well that I that I
bring into play. And you know uh one of
the things was an image of uh of the uh
of of the cross and Jesus on the cross
but then below it was a shattered uh
Roman uh god essentially. But the idea
of Christianity destroying the Roman
Empire uh is is is an interesting you
know it's a set of it's definitely a
theory that's out there and it's
certainly something that has made me
want to explore that particular concept
a lot more. uh and uh think about how it
impacts our our environment today from a
political perspective. So, you know, it
definitely was stimulating from an
intellectual perspective as well.
&gt;&gt; That's um
really fascinating. I'm sorry. I I'm
looking forward
&gt;&gt; I will say I was a little underwhelmed
by the Sistine Chapel. I hate to say
that.
&gt;&gt; I found the other rooms far more
interesting.
&gt;&gt; It's kind of like the Mona Lisa, right?
It's overtalked and small relative to
the other stuff, isn't it?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. It's also most of the work on the
Systeine Chapel is very much
concentrated in the ceiling and the
walls aren't near as in, you know, it's
not as immersive as some of the other
spaces.
&gt;&gt; Now, part of that is also that the state
is broken up by uh the sheer number of
people that are crammed into that space
at any given time. And it might be it's
probably a very different experience if
you're in there by yourself. Um, and
also they don't let you take pictures in
there. I'm like, okay. Uh, so I mean I
never really got to
um,
as a photographer
immerse myself into that space in the
way that I could with some of the
others. So Tom,
because of the people behind you reminds
me when I was in the forum in Rome. Have
you guys been to the forum in Rome?
Mojito. Okay. So, it's it's not a very
large place, but it's basically
most of Roman central history was there,
and some of the buildings are massive,
but you can only see little bits of
them.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; The presentation is absolutely horrible.
There's so little stuff there. Um really
surprising. So, of course, this was only
about two years ago. So, of course, I
had the idea of uh using AR. So you
would put on the headset, you walk
through and the buildings will be there.
And of course, some of the buildings
change, so you could dial in the time.
But the reason I'm mentioning it now,
Tom, the people behind you, I had the
idea that whenever there was a human
walking, you would see them, but they
would be dressed in Roman clothing.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Right. So you wouldn't bump into them,
right? That could probably be done now.
But but of course, the world we're
living in now, you can have virtual AI
guides, right?
&gt;&gt; Sure. And you have the color almost like
a color coding behind you that could
actually mean something about what kind
of information they can impart. Like it
used to be in the Apple store, different
geniuses, different shirts, right?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. One of the other um I mean I have
a book for instance that has a trans a
semi-transparent overlay where you can
take the ruins and
&gt;&gt; I know yes, I know what you're talking
about. actually better than being there
in person.
And sorry,
&gt;&gt; it's on my bookshelf downstairs, so I
can look at it anytime.
&gt;&gt; It's a lot cheaper than flying to Rome.
&gt;&gt; Yes. But the the thing is, you know,
you're talking about religion, so let's
bring that into the discussion for a
minute. Um, you know, I I've decided
that I'm happy with um the um Abrahamic
tradition, but I don't like the stuff
after the prophets.
you know, I I really don't like what the
Christians have done. I don't really
like what the Muslims have done, but I
like Muhammad and Jesus. And that's
fine. You know, we all have different
ideas of our spiritual needs. But I'm
saying it also because Tom, when I was
in a wedding in Rome, it was right down
the from the Vatican, one of the first
churches on the side was a Lebanese
Christian wedding.
&gt;&gt; The woman's voice singing had God in it.
And I'm not saying that to bring this
into a weird place, but I'm wondering if
it's partly the context of where we were
because it wasn't like a moving thing
and now I'm a Christian or whatever. It
was literal. It was like almost like a
bird on a wire. The bird is on the wire.
God is on the voice,
right? It it it was the weirdest thing
&gt;&gt; how we emotionally connect with
something or not.
Yeah, I mean I've had some interesting
it's also where you're sitting as well.
Um the one of interesting uh experience
I had years and years ago. Um, one of my
technicians was uh is uh is Niger one of
my technicians was but he still is
Nigerian um and very very uh
conservative from a religious standpoint
and uh of course there's this weird
conser also Christian I'm sorry very
Christian from a religious standpoint
and we went to the um baptism of his
triplets uh in their church and there
were a few of us that were not Nigerian
but the entire church was full of
Nigerians. Uh the thing I found really
fascinating was that of course Jesus on
the wall is this white blonde guy
and I'm like
what does that say about how you look at
Christianity and how your relationship
is with that? you know, that this is
from the west, therefore better,
therefore, you know, and all those
because it it just screamed colonialism
to me. And um and of course the reality
is of course Jesus probably did not look
like Thor
given where he was from.
&gt;&gt; It's a really good point and within our
world of the future of text, Karen Karen
Armstrong wrote a fantastic book called
The Biography of the Bible. Mhm.
&gt;&gt; So the the way the Bible has changed is
really really interesting and it should
be allowed to to be studied. You know,
Judaism, which obviously is kind of the
the daddy of Christianity, they have
specific rules on how to read, which I
think is really fascinating. You're not
allowed to read the Torah alone. You're
not allowed to read it for an extended
period of time. Shouldn't get into it.
that kind of cultural um or religious or
whatever you want to call no cultural
way of how we choose to approach the
material is really fascinating.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean, yes, it's subject to
interpretation and that that always
gives you the voice in your head that
you may be reading God wrong.
If someone else is always there and
says, "Well, I think it means this." And
they go, "No, no, no, it means this."
And then you argue about it and then you
come at that meeting in a very different
way than if you simply say, "God is
speaking through me to my my my flock."
&gt;&gt; Absolutely, Tom. But what's interesting,
it was actually Douglas Rushkov. I
forgot who it was. I have to look that
up or or wrote it in in one of the
books. What I mean is
we
don't always look at how we choose to
look, right? So for instance, now with
um and you're also photographers, so
obviously you and me are very similar.
Mo and Peter, are you also interested in
photography on a personal level just to
see where this sits?
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Okay. So, when you look at
something functionally,
it's kind of like you're looking at a
wall and you want to go around it. When
you're looking at it to be present,
you're looking at it and you realize
it's got texture, for instance, right?
And so, that's something in artistic
circles we discuss. But when we're
talking about textual material,
we very rarely other than how you know
you must question and read deeply, we
don't really talk about how to read. So
that's why I think the tradition of um
Jewish scholars demanding not the right
word you know what I mean you must read
it in this way is really fascinating.
Are there other ways especially you Tom
as a teacher are there ways you would
tell your students here is the certain
text you must read it in this way?
&gt;&gt; No I ab absolutely never do that. I
mean, that's that's part of why they
don't like it because they want me to
give them the answer. They want me to be
the preacher. They want me to be this
oracle on the stage. But I'm like, "No,
no, you have to figure this out for
yourself."
&gt;&gt; But what I'm Yeah.
&gt;&gt; No, no, no. Ju, just because of this
because I mean, obviously, we're living
in a point now where in the world I I
honestly think we need more religion,
not less. People should be spiritual and
not destroy this planet. We also need
less division. We got too much of that.
You know, I I have every once in a while
I remind Edgar
&gt;&gt; the religion generates both of those
things.
&gt;&gt; It it does, but we we have to do it with
with a
with a passionate love for everyone. I
mean, like, you know, Christianity is
not Christianity. Something Paul made
up. Jesus was only ever a Jew, right?
These are interesting things to know.
&gt;&gt; He existed at all.
&gt;&gt; Well, most likely he did. He's he's in
the record, but
&gt;&gt; he's not actually. But anyway,
&gt;&gt; but anyway,
&gt;&gt; the point of it is uh
&gt;&gt; the point of it is and I'm glad I'm
getting you to to fight me on this, Tom,
in a good sense.
&gt;&gt; Might it be interesting? You teach
history as well, right? That's one of
the things you teach.
&gt;&gt; No, I teach government, but of course I
have a deep and abiding love of history.
So,
&gt;&gt; but you teach some history of
government.
&gt;&gt; Sure. I mean, you can't separate the
two. I've always looked at government as
applied history.
that that's see that's where it gets
really nice. So I if you were to tell
your students here is a founding
document of America land
um read this as though you are British
or blah blah blah. Do you do that kind
of role play or is that silly? I mean
would you
&gt;&gt; it's not silly. Um it's hard to do that
kind of role play
um given the time constraints. Um, but
again, this is one of those things where
uh an AI can be helpful. Uh, I haven't
actually done this yet, but I've been
playing around with it. What if I loaded
up all of those foundational documents
into a notebook LM and essentially made
a founding father's bot and then had my
students interrogate that in different
ways and see what it says
&gt;&gt; or they can watch Hamilton,
&gt;&gt; right? And there's nothing wrong. I
mean, he he's he's very good with his
history, but
every history is is is is a set of
blinders because and this is a problem
with books in general, but you know,
there's no way to write a real book
of American history that's complete that
shows all of the different uh narratives
that exist have existed in this country
for the last 250 years uh or longer. And
it's it's just impossible. So the fights
that we get into is which version of
that are we going to teach our kids? And
that I think is a little bit silly
because yes, the the received version is
the the white man's version and that has
a value in and of itself because it is
the received version and you can't
ignore it. But that vision is also
impacted by these other visions and it
has effects on these other visions of
what America is and how America has
evolved over time that are have a
foundationally different perspective on
these things. And and one of the things
that I've you know thought about doing
this was one of the original ideas when
I started working on the knowledge
navigator is that what if you could
generate a map of history rather than a
book of history. And so as a teacher,
you're navigating your students through
a visual map that shows all of these
different strands of uh of American
history and how they intertw
isolated the the black community during
segregation and they basically built up
their own culture and all that stuff.
This is something people don't talk
about because they only talk about the
black culture in the context of the
white culture and they don't see that
whole aspect of it for instance and that
in of itself is a society and that's
really interesting and it still affects
the way we think about these things
today.
&gt;&gt; So I have a question for all three of
you regarding that there is no
a history is not one thing. No
&gt;&gt; right it can't be. uh when you're
talking about these strands, it's very
evocative and really cool. And you're
probably seen I have one of those huge
history timeline things over here
actually just for a quick second. But
but the question is coming.
It's like the um tuft, you know, the you
know the example of the Caribbean war or
whatever it was the um
how do you write a graph of
what happened to the troops and how
&gt;&gt; the the know you're talking about the
diagram of Napoleon marching into
&gt;&gt; Napoleon that was it whatever.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, it was it was marching into
Russia.
&gt;&gt; Yeah,
&gt;&gt; Tuy Tuy. Yes, defin I mean his
visualizations and and the insights
there are interesting.
&gt;&gt; Oh, absolutely. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; How you play that in VR AR kind of
worlds is interesting.
&gt;&gt; Well, it has to it has to inform how you
design those environments for sure. Uh
it's not the only thing, but it's one of
those things that that you know what Tuy
talks about is still very much
applicable to
um to that. Yeah, I haven't seen a good
mapping of Tuy to Okay, here's an AR.
Here's things I want to do that's
different that because I'm everything's
still flat PL pages and three space. I
mean, that's that we're stuck in there.
It's
&gt;&gt; Well, get to it, Froto. You got a week.
&gt;&gt; I think the v video game I mean, I
thought that, you know, Pokemon Go and a
video game some of that would kind of
Oh, that would break in the mold and you
figure out how you're going to do it. It
turns out it's very simplistic and it's
still,
&gt;&gt; you know, almost still a 2D thing. Oh,
there's a there's a thing over there.
It's an avatar, but it's still it's in
three space, but it's, you know, got
maybe it has a a 3D feel to it. You can
walk around it, but it's not
representing the information anything
other than we a normal physical thing
that might be there. There's no
&gt;&gt; uh extension of using graphics or lines
or force fields around things so you can
see colors or whatever. No one's
not a lot of that. Um I know some of the
game developers around here, we got a
big Epic Games and a bunch of other guys
do stuff and they try to do some
interesting things on the on the cusp of
doing interesting things. They got to
simplify it and make it dumb it down
maybe you'd call it. But to make it more
palatable to a gamer, a guy is going to
grow up and go Twitch and shoot things.
&gt;&gt; Oh, you don't need to go to Twitch and
shoot things.
&gt;&gt; So, here's the question. And sorry,
guys. Um, so those kinds of lines and
things are really, really cool. But this
is an example of you have an idea in
your head and it makes sense and you put
it down and it gets murky, right? Um you
you can't not that you were saying Tom
but for the sake of making my point you
can't have a line of you know black
culture is here and then there that's
way oversimplifying it. Sometimes you
can you know there are some things you
can do lines but how do you guys feel
and you know whether with or without
text if we have a full environment
uh we should uh oh that's really
beautiful Tom thank you what kind of
visual worlds would you want to step
into for this kind of history for
instance
&gt;&gt; yellow brick road.
&gt;&gt; But, you know, the idea that you you you
could you could actually see these
pathways and walk down them and explore
them uh in terms of, you know, you would
walk through American history as an
indigenous person. You could walk
through American history as a woman. You
could walk through American history as
as as a slave and former slave uh or as
an immigrant. and and how to color that.
One of So, do you guys remember uh
Second Life?
Yeah, I'm sure you have. Yeah. So, one
of the more interesting things I ever
saw on Second Life was some uh I forgot
what university did this, but they
actually modeled within Second Life the
experience of being schizophrenic
and created a visual. And that was very
impactful because it's one of the
hardest things to do as a teacher and as
a human being is to put yourself firmly
in someone else's shoes. And I've always
looked at XR as a way of doing that. Um,
and digital in general, you know, uh,
what is it like to walk through a town
in France if you're trying to learn
French? Uh, what is it, you know, those
those kind of things as well. Um, but
also you can get very abstract with
that. you know, if I'm a medical
student, can I do the uh what was the
name of that the movie where they shrunk
everybody down and injected them into a
body, but uh impossible to
&gt;&gt; voyage.
&gt;&gt; Fantastic voyage. Thank you. But yeah,
could you do that in a VR environment,
right? and as a way of teaching someone
the circulatory system or exploring the
structures of the brain or something
like that in an immersive environment
and then maybe see things in a different
way that from research perspective I
mean you could completely come up with
hey u this is all in all the imaging but
nobody's noticed it before and uh this
is that this is the alien probe that's
controlling all of our minds and things
like that it's right here
never saw it before but now I'm standing
inside the brain I see it.
&gt;&gt; So, uh,
&gt;&gt; yes and maybe.
&gt;&gt; Yes and maybe.
&gt;&gt; So, one of the nice updates with apps on
the Vision Pro was um the solar system.
There's now a really, really good one.
Unfortunately, I don't think I can scale
it to be correct scale, but at least
it's beautiful. It's massive. You move
it around, all of that stuff, right?
&gt;&gt; Um, so that's really really cool. So,
and also uh body parts, heart and
whatever you you can manipulate. Also,
there's a company that sells airplanes,
small airplanes to individuals. They
have a a vision app where you can do the
flight 180 stereo, which is nice. And
also, you can have the aircraft in front
of you, life-size,
and then you can put it on the floor.
So, even though you you can't climb in
it, of course, but when you stand inside
all the everything is there. But that's
all very very cool, and we should
support that. But when you're talking
about going down a path, I think we need
to we don't need to, but I think it' be
interesting to discuss what we might
mean by that because obviously Tom,
you're not talking about one woman if
you're talking about the woman's, you
know, there's also a myriad in all of
these, right? So even when we look at
those
&gt;&gt; the woman's experience the indigenous
you know if I were an immortal woman who
was living for 200 years and could walk
through history and see how other people
treated me in 1820 versus 1870 versus
1950 versus 2000 whatever that would be
really informative especially for those
of us that aren't women and don't see
society in the same way as a result for
instance
&gt;&gt; for instance that's the key there are so
many of these right So an embodied
experience where you are, let's say, in
a role playing game and you are
appearing as someone you were not
normally, see how people treat you, I
think it would be really worthwhile,
super cool and useful. Um, but when
you're talking about kind of moving down
these paths, I want to hold you guys to
that a little bit. What kind of, you
know, we put the headset on. Let's be
simple. We're now in the Roman forum.
The coliseum is over there. Uh, over
there is this, that, and the other. all
these things
and now we want to learn something about
let's say how women's rights were in
year zero when Rome was kind of on the
decline what is the manner you think
would be useful to pretend to be a woman
to talk to a woman to see other
information to see something abstract to
see structures to see timelines what are
your feelings guys
&gt;&gt; well I mean if it's an AR environment
and I'm actually standing in the forum
Um I think if that were my question the
first where I'd want to my starting
point of course is the architectural
because it's there. So there are certain
structures certain temples for instance
that are uh I can remember one that was
specifically
you know the vestal virgins or something
like that. I forgot what it was.
&gt;&gt; Yeah that's exactly small round one.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. And so maybe that's
my and then have it say start here.
Let's explain how this this this is one
of those important surviving structures.
Why did it survive? Why was it
important? Why was it here as opposed to
out in the suburbs somewhere? Uh, you
know, things like that. Um, and what
relevance did that have both from the
perspective of Roman society as a whole,
but also if you were a woman who was
seeing this and also maybe even a vestal
virgin herself being there and how that
would impact your relationship with the
rest of society. And you would maybe do
that through interaction.
Um, you could explore how it evolved
over time because that temple did not
exist in one moment in time. It was
built at a certain point but yet
maintained itself for the last 2,000
years. Um these are uh
interesting questions that you would
then follow down hopefully in a flow
state. Um a direction that leads you to
something unexpected in some ways
because I think that's the real winner.
So how then especially Moheit and Peter
putting you in and here everything Tom
said how would you like to actually
experience that through written text to
talking to people to looking at things
and so if you're looking at things what
should those things
&gt;&gt; Yeah I think I think you're going to
have to have you know plaques or or some
version of text that you're going to
step into to have some sort of
explanation. I think watching a dosent
or an AI avatar talk to you as a person
that's kind of interesting. Um I think
it's a much slower not if if talking to
&gt;&gt; what does it get you in theory?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. I mean essentially you want
to step into the information a little
bit and say well here's this and it was
here and there and of course as a
teacher you're going to build the links
in to that content to take you down.
Well, this is going to lead you down
towards, you know, hey, look at the way
the women's restrooms are treated versus
the men's and the baths and all that
kind of stuff. You know, there's a bunch
of things you want to lead people
towards as a learning journey. And I
think that's the part that just having a
3D
a 3D version of the Vatican or a 3D and
you don't have a dosent to guide you. I
mean, think of the Vatican as a 3D AR
kind of thing. It's just overwhelming
and you don't you don't get nearly as
much as you focus in. Well, here's the
painting by blah blah blah blah and you
get some sort of thread through it.
Well, you also get aed and by all the
other threads that are you could have
possibly done, but you you can't absorb
that all at once. You can go back and
ARVR is great. You can go back and
revisit and stand there in front of it
without, you know, physical constraints
other than, you know, your own bladder
and your own kind of ability to stay in
goggles for how long?
But I think it needs to be
very much
sculpted. You're sculpting an
environment for you to transition in.
Um, having the physical thing there, say
walking around Pompei or Rome, I think
it's an interesting thing, too. It's
relatively easy to do. It's Google Maps
with some, you know, you know, graphics
for things. You know, it's like street
view.
But uh there's a lot more to do there to
make the information behind it.
Again, I think this is where I I see you
doing for about all this text work of
saying, "Well, this text is actually
important, but how are you going to
frame it up on things?" Because you want
to be able to maybe you read it. Maybe
you have a voice that reads it for you
so you don't have to, you know, scan it
with your eyes. But reading is really
fast or glancing at things is really
fast. So you can dismiss irrelevant
paragraphs, irrelevant info nuggets,
nodes, pages, whatever we're going to
call these things. Um, and in Second
Life, you had a lot of things where you
had, you know, you put plaques on walls
and you had a little thing. Here's a a
piece of art that I did and here's a
description of it and you click on it,
you go to the website. Um, there's a lot
of things like that and it was amusing
and I don't know if I could get into
flow in any of the environments like
that. I never did. Um, but it was a way
to get people interacting with the
information in ways that they otherwise
wouldn't on a flat page or a book with a
linear um, you know, linear story you're
telling them. But I think you are
telling them, you are guiding people
through your point of view
by lining up the pieces of text or
putting the pages in a certain order or
having little guideposts that you're
going to go from here to here. um like
self-guided tours in in museums or parks
or whatnot.
Scan you right now you scan the UPC code
and it comes up with the audio of the
thing you're standing in front of and it
says, "Okay, go to the next one over
here."
I think you got to have all those links,
&gt;&gt; all those wiki links.
You gota a physical wiki
been talking
be able to pull up your hitchhiker's
guide to the galaxy your wiki links uh
thing which is what hitchhiker's guide
to the galaxy is. It's essentially a
pocket wikile links.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I am going to ask you but I just
want to say this t-shirt that I'm
wearing today because of the worldwide
developer conference. I actually bought
that the day I spent the day with Bill
Atkinson.
Ah,
&gt;&gt; so um it makes me think a lot of
hypercard and a lot of his ideas behind
that which was crazy. Uh yeah, Mo, how
would you want to navigate such a
historical or other
landscape or space or not even sure what
we would call it?
One thing you know when we visited you
know the Kashmir
Kashmir is a very contested uh
historical area. Uh and you know there
are three parties to the whole Kashmir
problem. Uh there is India uh which has
the largest part of it and then there is
China and there is Pakistan. uh and uh
all three so Kashmiri through the
millennials uh they have
their culture is uh closer uh to the
central Asian countries the Usbakistan,
Afghanistan, Iran
than many states in India. So uh when uh
when one is you know when uh during this
discussion it was just coming to my mind
what happens when we are at a place that
has a contested history that does not
have you know a factual narrative that
you can present uh quite clearly that uh
you know in a timeline in a fixed
timeline this thing happened then you
know
the people's rights changed such
revolution happened which brought
certain changes and uh how those uh
changes in turn then affected other
things which the revolution was not even
concerned with. Uh what happens when we
are not dealing with u information uh or
uh you know objects uh that do not have
a clearly demarcated
uh
form you know where where there are
contestations and uh it was uh I was
also thinking uh around it that the last
discussion in which I was not there uh
where in uh on figure and uh ground uh
wasn't isn't this the title for the June
figure and ground right?
Yeah. So you know in uh in that uh the
you know with uh with AI you know what
uh we can for examp
uh in notebook lm and uh have it uh
present as uh you know whatever he wants
uh it to be as the presenter. uh but
what happens you know there is a space I
feel uh that is there of uh uh the
individual inferences
like you know you would be looking for
you know you may be going to Kashmir or
you know uh at a particular site in Rome
and your experience of that site could
be radically different than of Tom's or
mine even though we are all four of are
looking at just uh similar or the same
places. Uh it's not true with things
that do that are factual or that do not
have contested histories. But most of
the things for example when Tom was
thinking of flow uh was talking about
flow uh you know how we architecturally
you know I think you know architecture
has a much more uh
sophisticated I don't know what if that
that's the right word to call but you
know they think of spaces as special
intelligence
in computers apart from the ex stuff. We
don't usually think of spaces as uh um
as objects that uh embody uh
you know intelligence like you know if
you are walking in cine chapel uh the
feeling it's not just about the
paintings that are painted there you do
have a certain uh embodied feeling that
is radically different probably from
other spaces. is
&gt;&gt; depends on how many other people are in
there with you.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; My memory of it is crowded, right? So it
kind of overwhelmed the beauty of it.
&gt;&gt; So you know how light, how shapes, how
your form uh play with other things. uh
I think you know when we are designing
uh interfaces
u especially in XR but in 2D as well uh
you know there are things that uh uh
it's not really a flat screen that we
can put anything on and it has the same
effect like you know the works of uh uh
situation situated art artists like
James Terrell or uh you know the spiral
Jetty, the the whole land movement in
American art or uh
the Robert Irwin.
Uh you know the we maybe we can utilize
more of the space
than we usually do. I mean because all
these artists you know James Turrell you
know he utilized Guggenheim
Guggenheim Museum in a very different
manner. uh when people visited his
exhibition at the Guggenheim, it was not
to see a painting. It was not to see you
know any sculpture or a form of uh art
but the place itself. So how can you
know we uh uh accentuate or uh use uh
the spaces uh that we interact in inside
of or through uh to assist us in uh this
you know I'm again coming back to that
you know we have uh search to find
things you know uh AI to give us uh
answers uh about things but there is
this space wherein you know we don't
have uh the right space so to speak so
to speak uh which helps us in drawing
inferences those individual inferences
that are unique to Toms that are unique
to Peter that are unique to Freud or Mo
you know which you know
uh which make us uh which uh affect us
our understanding uh make us who we are
uh even when we approaching subjects uh
or topics uh where uh there are no two
ways uh two ways about a certain fact.
But most of the things in life uh
require uh uh us to have that individual
understanding uh even uh when we are
taking classes. the understanding that
uh emerges in each student's mind uh
could be different than others
and I think
&gt;&gt; it almost always is.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And I and I think that you know
there uh there is no space for it. It's
uh it's not the prompt bar. It's
certainly not the search bar but uh you
know certain where wherein we can bring
those uh that cognitive uh uh load also
of the previous things and of the
current things like you know how how do
you enable the interactions
between
uh these things
&gt;&gt; that was really timely. Uh Mark Rothkco,
of course, is a great example of what
you're talking about.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. Rothkco. Yes. Yes.
&gt;&gt; When he did the ser work, of course, he
mocked up the room in order to make the
paintings fit the room. And of course,
um Renaissance painters did it too. I
can't remember who it is we saw in
Maltto. So, uh also
when you walk into a lawyer's office,
it's most likely dark wood. You know,
it's designed to give you a different
feeling than if you go to a dentist
office.
&gt;&gt; My ex-wife, she referred to this as
environment design
&gt;&gt; where the point of the environment was
the key and everything had to support
it. I've thought generally about this in
terms of that. But I I think you're
hinting something here, which is
information display shouldn't always
necessarily only be ambient. like you
have a vase in the corner that's showing
a certain color depending on the stock
market or weather or whatever. I think
what you're going for here which is
interesting is
elements of the space having different
effects for different reasons that are
not well not not random.
Um,
&gt;&gt; yeah. I mean, this is
&gt;&gt; Have you read this read this book? How
buildings Learn, Steuart Brand?
&gt;&gt; I uh I have this book. I've not read it.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I I have it, too. Yes. Classic.
&gt;&gt; It is it is a wonderful book, but but it
also it shocks me how few architects
have actually read it. I Every time I
run into an architect, I say, "Have you
read this?" No. The answer is usually
no. But then again, most of the computer
science graduates I talk to have no idea
who Doug Engelbard is either. So, you
know, um which is Yeah, I know. Um which
says something. Uh the reason that I
think that is such a fascinating book,
of course, it's a book about
architecture written by a technologist
and looking at architecture as a space,
a technological space. And so, you're
looking at a technological space as
architecture,
&gt;&gt; right? So, you're just flipping it.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. In a sense, I'm I'm saying that
the XR space that Froda is talking about
is is is the same thing in reverse. Um,
one of the things, of course, Brand
cautions against, he says the the
problem with most buildings is they're
monuments to their architects and um
they and especially the real So, as a
photographer, I love Frank Giri
buildings, but I have heard they are
hell to live in or live with. Uh, and
so, you know, I love taking pictures of
them because they're could do some
really cool stuff. But, you know, my fa
the the business school at Cleveland
State where where my father taught was a
Frank Gary building and he always
compared it to a crashed airliner.
Um, um, but it was still fun to and I
have some great pictures of it, too. Um
but uh the point I'm trying to make is
that um one of the things that Brand
talks about though is that we build
these the architects think of this as a
monument to themselves. They think of it
as a fixed object. Once it's built it's
frozen and the reality is buildings get
lived in. They get changed over time.
That's what he's talking about how
buildings learn that they that they
adapt to their users, the people inside
them. And the most successful buildings
are the ones that are the most
adaptable. Um, the building at MIT, I
can't remember what number it is now,
but there's that that building where
actually, ironically, there's a Frank
Giri building there now, but it was
built as a temporary building in World
War II. Uh, and it was it so much
innovation came out of that building uh
from the internet, a lot of the early
computer stuff. I mean, it was just but
it was kind of the building where they
threw everybody that they didn't know
where to put, right? But the other thing
about the actual architectural structure
is nobody gave a about it. They
would rip down walls, redesign it all
the time and rebuild it because there
was no, it was a temporary building. It
wasn't ever meant to last. So nobody had
any, you know, it was fundamentally an
ugly space. But the idea that you could,
you know, okay, well, we need to work
with the with the engineering
department. Let's rip down the wall
between us and and and set up a new
workg group. Um and so as I've gone to
designing learning spaces and other
kinds of things uh in the physical
environment, having that um building in
flexibility and fluidity into those
spaces is critical. Um because I know
that no matter what I think of in terms
of what a building should be doing or
how it should be working, a someone else
is going to think of it differently and
b they're definitely going to think of
it differently in five years or 10 years
down the road. And so the space has to
adapt to that reality. And I evaluate
the spaces that we've built over time is
how adaptable they are. And there are
some things that looked like they were
really good ideas at the time that we
spent a lot of money on that in
retrospect I was like if I had that to
do over I wouldn't do it that way, you
know, because of the fact that they were
too inflexible. Um they were trying to
force people to teach in a certain way.
There was a thing called an active
learning classroom which had these pods.
They were, but they were also connected
to each one of the pods was connected to
a screen and uh you could jack in your
laptop and and then project every every
pod could project up onto their own
screen, which was great from an
interactive perspective, but it sucked
from a space perspective because you
couldn't move them around because they
were stuck in place because of the
wires, right? And so in retrospect, I've
like, okay, let's just do mobile
furniture. We'll put whiteboards on the
wall. the cut the the electronics are
just lipstick, you know, and so the rest
of it doesn't matter. So the point I
want to make real quick before I know FO
wants to say something is one of the
challenges we run into right now as
we're building out these XR spaces is
because they are relatively hard to
build out, although compared to a
building, not so much. But because
they're relatively hard to build out,
I'm afraid that people aren't going to
be willing to change them. that we're
going to map out a map that we're going
to force everybody else into as opposed
to a map of infinite variety. So one of
the things I was thinking about as you
were talking it uh say imagine you were
in a environment trying to learn the
history of Kashmir and you were looking
at it from the Indian perspective but
maybe there are these ghosts around you
and one of them is a is a Chinese
perspective one of them is the Pakistani
perspective or or third a Kashmir
perspective and that as you walk through
this you get this sense that you're not
alone that this isn't your only path
that this isn't the only way through it.
That that to me is a triggering thing
because then your brain sort of goes,
"Wait a minute, I'm missing something
here." And then that leads you to
explore those other things in a way that
you probably wouldn't have if you were
just reading a book from the perspective
of an Indian uh that says, "Okay, this
is how Kashmir is and this is why it
should be Indian, right?" Um, and of
course borders are artificial constructs
in and of themselves and and in many
cases this particular border in
particular is not and a lot of others
they were established by people who
didn't live there.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. or in many cases didn't even had
never seen it or didn't live anywhere
near it, didn't know the people, didn't
know the geography, were just drawing
lines on a map, you know, and this is
one of our, you know, fundamental
problems with places like Iraq or
Jordan, which are just sort of
&gt;&gt; here's a ruler and you know, but yeah,
go ahead.
&gt;&gt; No, no, absolutely, Tom. That's it's
really important. I'm going to address
that, but I just want to show I put two
links in here. One of them is um the the
the podcast that I now have of the music
versions of the ref of the record of
each meeting. So this meeting will be on
that soon. Uh the earlier one is where I
do the same thing but for topics rather
than meetings is called thinking music
&gt;&gt; because it's not supposed to be pop
music but it's based on what we're
talking about. Um so what I find really
fascinating is um there are many people
in the community like my good friend and
colleague Mark Anderson who looks at it
in one sense Moheit from the opposite
way of your how you're looking at it. We
had a discussion last week on he thinks
I am very interested in fonts and I am
but I think that's kind of secondary. He
says we shouldn't use fonts we should
just write it. And of course he was
being joking because you can't have it
text on a digital screen without a font.
But he felt that it, you know, we should
have the data first. I think your
approach of really surfacing the surface
to put it that way is really really
important. I lean towards what you're
doing. Um, and I'm grateful for the
support of Mark because he understands
the data stuff much more than I do
because to me, I mean, my background is
in the visual arts. I'm an artist by
birth and by education and I studied
advertising. And in advertising, at
least in the '9s, the ad you see, that's
where the rubber hits the road. That's
the only exposure the audience has with
your message. So the concept behind it,
the planning, all of that stuff once you
make the ad is completely irrelevant.
Nobody's going to see here's my
marketing plan for Coca-Cola this year,
right? They will just see the ad. So
with the interface, the user will see
what they see. They won't see our
conceptual model of it. Hopefully we
have a a a coherent model. Um so I'm I'm
very glad. And also what what you're
pushing in my head Mo is more I mean I
can imagine the room I'm in now you know
we talked about many silly things like
maybe there's a a book there's a new
edition so that physical book on the
bookshelf when you have your AR headset
on blinks a little bit right
uh maybe a painting has certain
attributes
if something is happening in the world
maybe it drips a little bit you know
there's so many things we can start
playing with. And Tom's background keeps
giving me the idea of even here if I'm
struggling with something, Socrates
could walk into the room. Why not?
Right.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; I mean, I've had enough fights with
Socrates through Claude recently.
Anyway, I had an idea of Socrates demon
and then um
Claude says, "Well, actually, he did
have a demon and then this is what it
meant for something else." We can all
imagine that being dressed up in a
literally a toga, right? But but if you
guys um in our last 20 minutes here, if
you have ideas of
we're in an in we're in our normal room,
right? And we look around now. What are
the kind of things that could change
depending on
stuff that we care about?
I'll throw out a few and please
interrupt me when when you're ready. I
mean, one of the things I like is having
like pictures of you guys, like fake oil
paintings. And if one of you has
published a new paper, why not have that
character hold up a paper? If there's an
email message, stick something in the
corner. These ideas go back to
&gt;&gt; Didn't I see this in Harry Potter?
&gt;&gt; This I actually mocked all of this up in
the early 90s.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. but to be icons. So on your
finder, you would have an icon of
people, not documents. So they would
hold up, you would have a thing. But
yeah, Harry Potter's absolutely fine.
&gt;&gt; The paint the paintings though in the in
the in the hallway that were alive and
and that you could interact with the
characters and whatnot. That's what
immediately sprung to my mind.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. No, absolutely. But then also, you
know, what what are the other things?
You could have a landscape painting that
that can reflect something, but there's
&gt;&gt; that you can walk into.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And and exactly there's a
difference between ambient information,
you know, oh, my fake window shows it's
going to rain outside versus active
interaction. So, when you guys are in
London as opposed to Rome, we can go to
the National Gallery where like all
galleries, you have a huge wall that's
nothing and then you have a painting on
it to give you time to concentrate on
that work.
&gt;&gt; So, it's excluding other stuff, which is
the opposite. When do you want that?
rather than what is behind Tom now,
which is overwhelming in the intended
sense, right?
Do we want the floor to change? Do we
want the ceiling to have different
characteristics?
I mean, in a um casino, you can't tell
whether it's night or day, right?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So
spooling back to something you said a
little while ago though in terms of the
ad. Um the process that happens before
the ad is absolutely in the ad in the
sense that you know it was the process
that led to the ad and if that process
were different you would have a
different ad um and or pathways were not
taken and so on and so forth. I was
listening to an interview with this guy
Robert Tersek uh last week. Here's his
site. Um, and he was talking about how
uh one of the reasons that Hollywood
can't handle AI is because the way that
they build movies is such a cumbersome
process
that, you know, you have to put all this
stuff in place years ahead of time and
then by the time the movie actually
comes out, it doesn't land the way you
expect it to, especially ones that are
built around the popular imagination.
And the example he uses uh is the the
fact that last weekend I believe it was
um uh um
the um uh uh the the that uh uh this
this independent movie that was made by
a YouTube creator called back back rooms
or something like that. um outperform
Mandalorian and Grou which cost 10 times
or 100 times as much money to make. And
the process for Mandalorian and Grou the
movie probably started three four years
ago when they were making the series and
they pitched out the series as a movie
and blah blah blah and everything else
happened and then they all the things
that go together to make a movie
happened and and the movie came out
because of that process in the way that
it did and it landed badly. I think I
haven't seen it yet, but I'm hearing
it's
&gt;&gt; and I will give you my review after.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Uh, but it, you know, one of the
things that I really loved about the
first season of Mandalorian
was the episodic nature and the fact
that they had a different director with
a really strong creative vision for each
episode.
And yeah, there was a thematic line that
went through all of them, but you could
see they're doing seven samurai now.
They're doing, you know, they were doing
homages to uh older cinematic universes,
so to speak, in the same way that George
Lucas did it in Star Wars. Uh, and uh,
the problem was when Star Wars becomes
self-reerential, you're not really
creating anything new. And uh you're you
know you're you're you're riffing on the
same same chord.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; I I don't
&gt;&gt; I don't know if that's what's wrong with
Mandalorian and Grou, but what happened
in the second and third seasons of those
is they became much more
&gt;&gt; um uh
narrative big narrative connected into
and and and that they became less
distinct and so you lost a lot of that.
Um, the flip side of that is to have
something like Andor where you have a
very strong creative control with Tony
Gilroy and that he basically built that
from beginning to end himself and that
he didn't go through a lot of
compromises to do it. Uh, but there are
relatively few people who can get away
with that and you see that you know the
Christopher Nolans of the world.
&gt;&gt; Let's not go too far into Cinema Land.
&gt;&gt; I will give you my review of the Gro
Mandalorian. I loved it.
&gt;&gt; Right. And there is a meta question that
comes in. Okay. That is what do people
expect something to be, right?
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Very often I I see um Yeah, thank you
Mo. I look forward to receiving it. That
was a really good recommendation. Thank
you.
&gt;&gt; Um so something like you know if to be
very crass if you watch something with
you know pretty things on the internet
you're not worried about the story,
right? Star Wars also is very much about
the atmosphere.
Right. Do I care that these two people
are princess and No, I care about the
running around and the scary and the
chase. At least when I watched it the
first time, Mandalorian and Grou is
I I thought it was brilliant and it
relates to our work really because I
thought it was brilliant because of its
simplicity.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Stories are humans coming up with stuff.
Why should you always have twists and
character developments and expanding the
cannon?
Sometimes that's great. I mean, Hero
that we talked about in the beginning,
it's probably the only movie I can
really think of where I care about the
cinematography, the music, the
characters, and the story,
but it's like you go to different
restaurants,
you know, you go to McDonald's every
once in a while and you don't worry
about the wine, right? So, I'm wondering
if we take that back to our knowledge
systems.
Sometimes you want a cartoon Socrates
and that's it. Other times you want to
hugely richly textual with millions of
things happening and it's difficult for
us to be honest about that in our own
imagination I think because it's so easy
to kind of in in a sense want it all.
Does that make sense?
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; You know. Yeah. the um I have strong
opinions on the whole um on this issue
because one of my close friends her ex
his uncle did the costumes for Star Wars
and
&gt;&gt; yeah and and I'm not saying that
&gt;&gt; what 50% atmosphere right
&gt;&gt; that's an example
&gt;&gt; so if we then go back into our world and
we look at Tom's still provocative
background
what are we seeing there are We learning
something about the history of Christ.
No. What we're getting is a sales pitch
of an atmosphere.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Right. I can't remember. Please tell me
when you think of it. All rhetoric is
persuasion. Right.
Nobody says something without meaning to
persuade somebody. Even if it's a simple
like you just did now. Yes. You're
making a sound to show approval. Right.
All art also is there to persuade.
The persuasions are very different. They
can be logical, emotional, titillating
and all what what have you.
I think we should try to have more art
level discussions in our community
because
very often it seems we go down the
ladder of here's an academic. How can we
teach him or her
&gt;&gt; the multiple way to critique this thing
regarding this other thing?
&gt;&gt; And that's thank you again mid for
bringing it up. That is valid and
important but it ain't everything right.
Similarly, sometimes we want to read
just a page on paper.
Yeah. Get the whole thing together.
But you want that rhetoric to be, you
know, here's a nice linear argument. You
read it. Okay. I can digest that in a in
a sitting. I might not want to read it
in a novel. I'd rather read it on a web
page or a wiki or a short story. I know
short stories are one of my favorite
forms of fiction. And I guess in terms
of knowledge nuggets, whatever you call
these nodes,
there's a lot of those medium articles
and and you know, form entries and
YouTube whatevers that are kind of short
form.
Here's what I want to convince you of
something. M
&gt;&gt; now wandering around a 3D VR world
without any guidance without the
signpost guiding you to leading you
around
you end up with Second Life where you
just people are wandering around just
doing random stuff and it you'd have to
enter a structured environment to
actually get something useful out of it.
But you could always just want oh I'm
tired of this and learning about
whatever this is. I can go over here and
play with other folks in in different
sandboxes.
So,
I'm not sure the authoring tool again.
You your tools called author. You're you
you're trying to build something to help
authors author things. What's the thing
you want to have? What's the final
product you want to kind of push out
there? A wiki website, a you know,
pretty a book,
uh, you know, a research paper.
You want to structure the knowledge in a
way that gets that's useful for you. By
structuring in the paper, I get you know
publishing points and you know my degree
gets forwarded you know gets I move my
degree forward and I get published. Uh
but also you're just clarifying in your
own mind what the heck you just went
through. Um,
now I know people who build lots of wiki
pages and lots of uh distributed
information structures and they end up,
you know, using AI to generate things,
riffing on their concepts. They end up
with, you know, thousands of pages of
relatively interesting stuff. It's fun
to kind of go and run the search engine
over it and go find the nuggets that
happen to be hiding out there,
but at some point you want to structure
that into a narrative of some sort.
and rid of the VR narrative is is the
right thing to do or the AR narrative
but put the put the pages out in space
so you have to walk around them. So you
walk around the Vatican rather than have
a picture book that you flip.
That's why I was getting to to you Fro
you've got a you've done more in the
headset with text than anyone I know.
&gt;&gt; I I have to show you something. You you
really hit on something there. Sorry. I
just cut the finger here.
&gt;&gt; So you've seen this feature but it's
relevant to show now. It's just flats.
But here's author, right? So this is um
mostly written by Claude
and I'm fine with that because I've gone
through it and it's for me it it's not
for publication, right? But then I do
this important thing I think of doing
the highlighting to mark specific text.
That's why some of the text is orange.
The reason for that is if there is a
paragraph that doesn't have
something that is worth making orange
because orange means this is the key
thing in this paragraph. Everything else
is connective in context for a reader.
But me as the author, as I skim through,
I need to know what it is, right? So,
you will see I haven't got it for all of
them because I'm playing. But here's the
fun bit. If I now click on outline.
Yeah. Well, first outline and then I can
just click on overview.
Any marked text shows up.
So, that now should be entirely
readable.
I should be able to read the whole paper
understand everything as the author who
doesn't need a connected beautiful
sentences right so for instance what
Socrates wanted from the living word was
not chatter but accountability so it was
just talk responsive text LLM offers the
form of exchange while quietly removing
its function it answers so you need not
reason
this is the whole thing so that was
really fun you I built that this week.
The that particular document, the
features been there for a while. So, uh,
what you're talking about, Peter, is one
thing we talked a lot about in the
hypertextual community, overviews and
more information.
So, what happened this week with this
particular document is it became
obvious in its sense in itself, but we
don't have the means through which we
can share that yet. So this is one of
the key issues of origami text or
something similar whereby the source
document has this marked text as a let's
call it author's
gourmet selection
that was actually vent wanted that to
stay there encoded so you can choose to
read at that level.
So you you can shoot
&gt;&gt; I I see that I see the those hyper
you're you're building hyperlinks and if
you were to do it the the the other way
around is put your topics down. You do
the outline first if you're you're doing
a structured writing. I'm doing an
outline and then expand it into those
paragraphs. But having the AI generate
that stuff and kind of perusing it is an
interesting way of feriting out those
things that you might not find yourself.
So I think that's
if you to write it from first principles
given your own innate knowledge start
with an outliner and work your way down.
You're working backwards from
disperate bits.
&gt;&gt; So
&gt;&gt; into an outline and and you got you got
your signposts
now.
&gt;&gt; That's ex Sorry, Peter, I'm interrupting
you because you're getting me excited.
Please continue.
&gt;&gt; No, no, no. I I I want you to continue
too cuz I I like I like what I see there
and there's nothing AR VR about what
you're doing, but I think you could
display those in an ARVR way so you can
see the relationships better. Whether
that's actually helps you, you know,
having all that depth of, oh, here's the
context for this thing and it comes from
that thing and you have links like when
you view a wiki with all its links, you
end up with the rat's nest kind of
thing. Um, it's that process of you
boiling it down to those top outlines.
You know, what the things you've
highlighted
and throwing away the rest or it's out
there to kind of go back to in case you
feel you miss something or you wanted
some depth. But, uh, it's the elusion.
It's the deletion. Removing what isn't
the it's it's sculpture. Remove what
isn't the thing you want to sculpt.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Exactly. So um this is a not a
complete thing but yeah so with with
this
in one sense it's interesting that is AI
for exactly the reasons you said. Yeah,
&gt;&gt; but it's also designed for your own
writing.
But the point is that if there is a
paragraph that doesn't have anything to
highlight, why is it there?
So it it is designed to help you engage.
I hate the word actually. I don't think
things intentionality.
You know, you're intentionally saying
what something is. And I don't have the
tech support framework right now to
bring this into XR, but I would like to
be able to do these as nodes and then
have them come out. So this is what
we're doing with end notes.
Uh end notes if you haven't so you know
you can extract a section from a
document where you have the heading and
the body text. In XR, you see just the
heading. You open it, you see the
heading plus all the text before the
next. So, this thing here that we're
experimenting with is um showing the um
end notes kind of coming out of that.
So, they just appear as as little blocks
next to it. So you don't have them in
the text because end notes are yet
another type of um further layering
hypertextually whether linked or not.
Right?
So this is what we are experimenting
with. You see the thick notes they're
the ones that are sections the other
ones are just concepts.
So the the way through which
&gt;&gt; Jared Hegland FaceTime
&gt;&gt; that's my mother. I've tried her all
day. Uh the way through which you sculpt
is really really important because if
you have a structure too quickly,
it tends to shut down creative thinking
which is fine for some kinds of writing
obviously but you know beginning,
middle, end research and whatever. So
being able to write freely may or may
not help.
Um, and how you bring, as you said,
Peter, how you bring this into an XR
environment is really difficult
conceptually. And um,
the the thing is, I can't remember who
said it, but it came up today where
if you were to put on your headset, wait
for things to load and all of that stuff
to see a new thing every time. That's
not interesting. It has to be something
you can continue building, right? And
Peter, when you talk about wikis, they
can explode. So you really need very
efficient nesting mechanisms or linking
mechanisms, right?
So then the interesting question becomes
what are you nesting for yourself and
what are you nesting for publication?
And that's probably a topic for next
time.
My only plea is keep it flexible.
&gt;&gt; That that's the key. That that is
exactly the key. Keep it flexible, Tom.
Because
&gt;&gt; fluid and flexible really matters. I
think
&gt;&gt; and you but have guidance. I mean you
cursor and you can draw everything. No,
I want a paintbrush that has a texture
so I can just kind of there's a lot of
work there to get that guidance. So that
for the most part there's a path through
that that results in some feedback loop
versus frustration of you know you're
doing pointalism or something like that.
That's extremely frustrating unless
you're into that kind of art. But um
it it is and and then we get to the
notion of um in anything the more
control the more skill and effort
right you can fly to a city but you'll
have to land at the airport. You can
take a bus, you have to get off the bus
stop. You're on a bike, you can go
almost anywhere, but you need the skill
to use the bike, right? And when you
come to art, knowing how to, you know,
like I said, we saw hero yesterday,
which is partly about calligraphy
&gt;&gt; to do it, you got to have the the
control. So, you you need to have, as
Doug obviously said, layers of how
engaged you want your user to be. Um,
and Tom, when you talk about flexibility
versus scaffolding versus control, I
think that is the very very nub of what
good interaction design is. And now I'm
going to have to go because Apple's
going to announce stuff. Everybody
switch over to WWDC.
&gt;&gt; I'm going to go have lunch.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I'm I'm gonna go take my sister to
the doctor and I'll let everyone
summarize it for me and I'll I'll watch
whatever. Make a song just for you,
Peter.
&gt;&gt; Make a song of it. The song of the WWE.
&gt;&gt; Going to sing sing.
&gt;&gt; Thank you very much, guys. Pleasure.
